Project Gutenberg's The Spanish Royal Tapestries, by Albert F. Calvert

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Spanish Royal Tapestries

Author: Albert F. Calvert

Release Date: November 26, 2019 [EBook #60790]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SPANISH ROYAL TAPESTRIES ***




Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images available at The Internet Archive)









                          THE SPANISH SERIES


                           THE SPANISH ROYAL
                              TAPESTRIES




                          THE SPANISH SERIES

                     _EDITED BY ALBERT F. CALVERT_


                        GOYA
                        TOLEDO
                        MADRID
                        SEVILLE
                        MURILLO
                        CORDOVA
                        EL GRECO
                        VELASQUEZ
                        THE PRADO
                        THE ESCORIAL
                        SCULPTURE IN SPAIN
                        MURCIA AND VALENCIA
                        ROYAL PALACES OF SPAIN
                        SPANISH ARMS AND ARMOUR
                        GRANADA AND ALHAMBRA
                        LEON, BURGOS AND SALAMANCA
                        TAPESTRIES OF THE ROYAL PALACE
                        CATALONIA AND BALEARIC ISLANDS
                        VALLADOLID, OVIEDO, SEGOVIA
                        ZAMORA, AVILA AND ZARAGOZA


                                LONDON
                      JOHN LANE, THE BODLEY HEAD




                           THE SPANISH ROYAL
                              TAPESTRIES

                         BY ALBERT F. CALVERT
                        WITH 277 ILLUSTRATIONS


                  LONDON: JOHN LANE, THE BODLEY HEAD
                  NEW YORK: JOHN LANE COMPANY MCMXXI



                     H. & K., Ltd., London, S.E. 1




PREFACE


In point of size, scope and general interest, this little book is
perhaps the least considerable of the score of volumes comprised in The
Spanish Series, but the collection would have lacked something of the
completeness I have endeavoured to secure for it, if the subject of
which it treats had not been included. As is inevitable in a series of
this kind, many of the books are devoted to aspects and monuments of
Spanish history and achievement, which have served the purpose of
writers in all ages, but which could not, on that account, be omitted,
while others have an imperative claim to inclusion on the ground that,
though of secondary importance, they have never been dealt with
elsewhere.

The Tapestries which are here reproduced in greater number and variety
than has hitherto been attempted are known to students and connoisseurs
the world over, but the measure of that knowledge is limited. Many of
the pieces in the possession of the Spanish Crown were acquired by
purchase or inheritance, and others were woven in the Netherlands to the
command of its Burgundian rulers, Margaret of Austria and Mary of
Hungary. The fabrics designed by Goya owed their existence to the
extraordinary interest displayed in the products of the looms by Charles
III., while the famous Tunis Tapestries were designed and woven by Jan
Vermay or Vermeyen, the Court painter and Wilhelm Pannemaker, the
celebrated Flemish weaver, under the personal direction of the Emperor
Charles V. Vermeyen accompanied the expedition which was launched
against Tunis by Charles in 1535 and made his sketches on the spot; the
contract given to Pannemaker by his Imperial patron stipulated the
amount and quality of the silk and the number and value of the gold and
silver threads to be employed; and both designs and finished pieces had
to be submitted to the Emperor’s scrutiny and approval before the
purchase price was paid.

The Tunis Series was completed in 1554. The Tapestries were displayed in
England on the occasion of the marriage of Philip and Mary in that year,
and were not seen again in this country until 360 years later. They
subsequently figured in all the great functions of the Spanish Court,
and it was due to the Emperor’s fear that constant usage would injure
the fabrics that a duplicate set, but on a smaller scale, was woven. The
twelve pieces were again reproduced, on the same scale as the original
frames, in 1740 by order of Philip V. A third copy is preserved in the
Museum at Vienna, and a fourth, woven by Pannemaker, was found by the
Maréchal de Contades in a castle near Mecklin during the Seven Years
War.

This collection of Spanish Royal Tapestries has been steadily
accumulating since the thirteenth century, but the practice of weaving
was not introduced into Spain until the first quarter of the seventeenth
century when a little colony of Flemish weavers, subsidised by the King
of Spain, settled at Pastrau in New Castile. A century later, at the
invitation of Philip V., Jacques Van Der Goten and his four sons,
established themselves in an _atalier_ in Madrid, and in 1776 Goya drew
the first of the forty-five designs for Tapestries which, in the
following fifteen years, were woven in the Royal workshops of Santa
Barbara in Madrid.

Although this wonderful collection has been added to by successive
Spanish sovereigns over a period of six centuries, no effort was made to
arrange, classify, or catalogue the fabrics until the work was put in
hand at the instigation of Alfonso XII., and carried to completion by
the late Queen Isabella. In 1903 an album of photographic reproductions
of many of the finest specimens was published with historical and
descriptive notes by Count Valencia de Don Juan, and this remained the
only volume on the subject until 1914, when I prepared an illustrated
handbook of the Tunis Series which, by gracious permission of King
Alfonso, were displayed at the Anglo-Spanish Exhibition in London. The
present book is the first attempt that has been made to present in
English a record of the most valuable and interesting examples in the
Royal Collection.

                                                    ALBERT. F. CALVERT.

“ROYSTON,”

  ETON AVENUE,

    LONDON.




CONTENTS


CHAP.                                                               PAGE

  I. HISTORY OF THE ART OF TAPESTRY WEAVING                            1

 II. THE FOUNDATION OF THE SPANISH ROYAL COLLECTION                   14

III. THE GOTHIC TAPESTRIES--SACRED PIECES                             18

 IV. TAPESTRIES OF THE GOTHIC-RENAISSANCE TRANSITION                  24

  V. RENAISSANCE TAPESTRIES                                           55




ILLUSTRATIONS


SUBJECT             PLATE

THE STORY OF THE VIRGIN. CARTOONS BY VAN EYCK.

1. Jesus with His Mother                                               1

2. The Virgin praying                                                  2

3. The Adoration of the Magi                                           3

4. The presentation of Jesus in the Temple                             4


THE STORY OF DAVID AND BATHSHEBA.

1. David sees Bathsheba                                                5

2. Bathsheba consents to the love of David                             6

3. Nathan reproaches David with his sin                                7


THE STORY OF ST. JOHN THE BAPTIST.

1. Zacharius recovering his speech                                     8

2. The child John devotes himself to God                               9

3. St. John preaching in the wilderness                               10

4. The baptism of our Lord                                            11


THE PASSION OF OUR LORD. CARTOON BY VAN DE WEYDEN.

In the garden of Olives                                               12

The Crucifixion                                                       13

The descent from the Cross                                            14


VICES AND VIRTUES.

1. God rewards worship                                                15

2. Virtue punishes vice                                               16

3. Fortune distributes roses                                          17

4. God rewards those who are devout                                   18

5. Virtue rewards her votaries                                        19

6. God distributes honours                                            20

7. Prudence is commended                                              21

8. The faithful gain renown                                           22

9. Infamy is punished                                                 23

10. The law giver delivers judgment                                   24


THE FOUNDATIONS OF ROME.

1. Romulus and Remus are found                                        25

2. Remus taken captive                                                26

3. Romulus becomes King                                               27

4. Romulus dictates the laws                                          28

5. Romulus institutes the Feast of Neptune                            29

6. Romulus gives the laws to the people                               30

7. Hersilia is presented to Romulus                                   31


CONQUEST OF TUNIS. CARTOONS BY VERMEYEN.

Plan of the campaign                                                  32

Review of the Army                                                    33

Review of the Army (part of)                                          34

Disembarkation at Goletta                                             35

The attack on Goletta                                                 36

Fight under Goletta                                                   37

The sortie from Goletta                                               38

The capture of Goletta                                                39

The capture of Tunis                                                  40

The sacking of Tunis                                                  41

The re-embarkation at Goletta                                         42

The Army camping at Pada                                              43


THE STORY OF ABRAHAM.

1. Three Angels announce to Abraham that Sarah
will have a son                                                       44

2. Abraham offering sacrifice                                         45

SCENES FROM THE REVELATIONS.

1. The Angel throws the beast into the Abyss                          46

2. The three horsemen                                                 47

3. St. John and the seven churches of Asia                            48

4. St. John and the Temple of God                                     49

5. Condemnation of the prostitute                                     50

6. The Angel carrying the Gospel                                      51

7. The crowd adore the lamb                                           52

8. The four Angels of Euphrates                                       53

9. Combat between good and evil spirits                               54


THE SEVEN DEADLY SINS.

1. Luxury                                                             55

2. Greediness                                                         56

3. Envy                                                               57

4. Anger                                                              58


ACTS OF THE APOSTLES.   CARTOONS BY RAPHAEL.

1. The miraculous draught of fishes                                   59

2. The miraculous draught of fishes                                   60

3. The miracle of the paralytic                                       61

4. The death of Ananias                                               62

5. The martyrdom of St. Stephen                                       63

6. The martyrdom of St. Stephen                                       64

7. The conversion of St. Paul                                         65

8. The blindness of Elymas                                            66

9. St Paul at Lystria                                                 67

10. St. Paul in the Temple                                            68

11. St. Paul at Ephesus                                               69

12. St. Paul at Ephesus                                               70

13. St. Paul preaching in Athens                                      71

14. Christ appears to His Disciples                                   72

15. Christ choosing St. Peter                                         73

16. The paralytic                                                     74

17. Death of Ananias                                                  75

18. Conversion of St. Paul                                            76

19. The blind man Elymas                                              77

20. St. Paul and St. Barnabas at Lystria                              78


THE STORY OF VERTUMNUS AND POMONA.

1. Vertumnus transformed into a husbandman                            79

2. Vertumnus takes a fishing rod                                      80

3. Vertumnus transformed into an agriculturist                        81

4. Vertumnus transferred into a gardener                              82

5. Vertumnus transformed into a reaper                                83

6. Vertumnus at the harvest                                           84

7. Pomona upbraids Vertumnus                                          85

8. Vertumnus disguised kisses Pomona                                  86

9. Vertumnus regains his natural form                                 87


THE STORY OF SCIPIO AFRICANUS.

1. The capture of Carthage                                            88

2. Scipio saves his father                                            89

3. Carthage sends Ambassadors                                         90

4. The triumph of Scipio                                              91

5. The banquet                                                        92

6. Scipio gives up his betrothed                                      93

7. Scipio gives up his betrothed (section)                            94

8. Scipio delivers judgment                                           95

9. The triumph                                                        96

10. Scipio and Hannibal                                               97

11. The triumph of Scipio                                             98


THE STORY OF CYRUS.

1. Cyrus takes Astyage prisoner                                       99

2. Cyrus is recognised by Astyage                                    100

3. Meeting of Cyrus and the Queen                                    101

4. Cyrus sends a messenger                                           102

5. Cyrus unites the Medes and Persians                               103

6. Cyrus saves Croesus from the Stake                                104

7. The Queen and Cyrus                                               105

8. Cyrus takes Croesus prisoner                                      106

9. Cyrus and the Lydians                                             107

10. Cyrus releases the Hebrews                                       108

11. Cyrus is entrusted to a Shepherd                                 109

12. Hystaspe and Amenophis                                           110


THE STORY OF DIANA.

1. Birth of Diana                                                    111

2. Diana resting                                                     112

3. Diana and Jupiter                                                 113


THE SPHERES.

1. Hercules supports the sky                                         114

2. Atlas supports the world                                          115


THE STORY OF DECIUS.

1. Decius raises his country                                         116

2. Decius sends lictors to Manlius                                   117

3. Decius bids farewell to the lictors                               118

4. Decius departs to fight the Latins                                119

5. Decius dedicates himself to the Legions                           120

6. Valerius and Decius                                               121

7. The vision of Decius                                              122

8. Death of Decius                                                   123

9. Funeral of Decius                                                 124


THE STORY OF VENUS.

1. Offerings to Venus                                                125

2. The challenge of Cupid and Venus                                  126


STORY OF THE CREATION OF MAN.

1. God creates man                                                   127

2. Cain kills his brother Abel                                       128

3. God curses Cain                                                   129

4. The tree of good and evil                                         130

THE STORY OF TOBIAS.

1. Sarah marries Tobias                                              131

2. The return of Tobias and Sarah                                    132


THE SEASONS.

1. Summer                                                            133

2. Winter                                                            134


THE STORY OF SOLOMON.

1. Solomon is annointed King                                         135

2. Solomon marries an Egyptian Princess                              136

3. Solomon and the Queen of Sheba                                    137


HISTORY OF A MAN’S LIFE.

1. Divinity advocates Temperance to Man                              138

2. The Vices repulse Temperance                                      139

3. Time surrounds him with Prudence                                  140

4. Virtue triumphant                                                 141

5. Patience humiliates Fortune                                       142

6. Fortune fights avarice                                            143

7. Blind Fortune bestows good and evil                               144

8. Two ancient philosophers                                          145

9. Divinity reveals Temperance                                       146

10. Vice repulses Temperance                                         147


STORY OF ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA.

1. Anthony leaves Rome                                               148

2. Anthony receives homage                                           149

3. Anthony disposes of Egypt’s treasures                             150

4. Cleopatra mocks Anthony’s weakness                                151


THE STORY OF ALEXANDER THE GREAT.

1. Alexander and his Doctor Philip                                   152

2. The battle of Issus                                               153

3. The siege of Tyre                                                 154

4. Alexander in Carmonia                                             155

5. Surrender of the Kings of Cyprus and Phœnicia                     156

6. Alexander in Asia Minor                                           157

THE TRIUMPH OF LOVE                                                  158

THE TRIUMPH OF DEATH                                                 159

THE TRIUMPH OF CHASTITY                                              160


THE STORY OF TOLEMACHUS.

1. The young Tolemachus                                              161

2. Neptune wrecking Ulysses’ ship                                    162


THE STORY OF PAUL.

1. St. Paul in the Temple                                            163

2. St. Paul before Agrippa                                           164

3. St. Paul executed at Rome                                         165


TEMPTATION OF ST. ANTHONY.

1. St. Anthony departs for the Retreat                               166

2. St. Anthony tempted by the Devil                                  167

3. Paradise, Purgatory and Hell                                      168


STORY OF THE EMPEROR OCTAVIUS.

1. Julius Cæsar adopts Octavius                                      169

2. The battle of Phillippi                                           170

3. Octavius closes the Temple of War                                 171

4. Death of Cleopatra                                                172


THE STORY OF MOSES.

1. Moses and Aaron before Pharoah                                    173

2. God chooses Moses to deliver Israel                               174

3. Moses comes from Mt. Sinai                                        175

BATTLES OF THE ARCHDUKE ALBERT.

1. Surrender of Hulst                                                176

2. Ardres surprised by a night attack                                177

3. Hulst besieged                                                    178

4. Taking of Calais                                                  179

5. The return of the garrison                                        180


THE STORY OF THESEUS.

1. Theseus leaves for Crete                                          181

2. Theseus receives the sword of Ægeus                               182

3. Ægeus recognises his son                                          183

4. Theseus armed with the Mace                                       184

5. Bacchus marries Ariadne                                           185

6. Theseus receives the ring of Minos                                186

7. Theseus leads the bull of Marathon                                187

8. Theseus and the head of Minotaurus                                188

THE FUNERAL OF KING TURMUS                                           189

DIDO AND THE PORTRAIT OF ÆNEAS                                       190


THE STORY OF SAMPSON.

1. Sampson propounds his riddle                                      191

2. Sampson is betrayed by Delilah                                    192


THE STORY OF NOAH.

1. Noah building the Ark                                             193

2. Noah leaving the Ark                                              194


THE WAY OF HONOUR.

1. Grace accords immortal crowns                                     195

2. Virtue accords honour                                             196

3. Merit receives reward                                             197


STORY OF ZENOBIA.

1. Nuptial banquet of Zenobia and Odenat                             198

2. Zenobia is taken prisoner                                         199

3. Zenobia led captive                                               200

STORY OF DON QUIXOTE.

1. Departure of Don Quixote                                          201

2. Don Quixote and the three Peasant Women                           202

3. Princess Micomicona                                               203

4. Don Quixote is beaten by the Merchants                            204

5. Don Quixote is enclosed in a cage                                 205

6. The Muleteer meets Don Quixote                                    206

7. Sancho marches to Toboso                                          207

8. Repetitions of preceding pictures                                 208


STORY OF PHAETON.

1. Phœbus allows Phaeton to drive the chariot of
the sun                                                              209

2. Phaeton drives the chariot of the sun                             210

3. Jupiter confounds Phaeton                                         211

4. The body of Phaeton is recovered                                  212

CHASTITY PUTS CUPID TO FLIGHT                                        213

RUSTIC SCENES AFTER GOYA AND BAYEU                                   214

PANELS AFTER GOYA                                                    215

QUARREL IN AN INN, AFTER GOYA                                        216

PANELS AFTER TENIERS                                                 217

PANELS AFTER TENIERS                                                 218

PANELS AFTER TENIERS                                                 219

VILLAGE DANCE AFTER TENIERS                                          220

PANELS AFTER TENIERS                                                 221

DESCENT FROM THE CROSS                                               222

CHRIST ON THE CROSS                                                  223

THE CRUCIFIXION, BY VAN DER WEYDEN                                   224

OUR LORD APPEARING TO THE HOLY WOMEN                                 225

ST. JEROME IN THE DESERT                                             226

THE ETERNAL FATHER                                                   227

OUR LORD AND ST. VERONICA                                            228

MARY ANNOINTING THE FEET OF THE SAVIOUR                              229

THE CONFUSION OF TONGUES                                             230

THE LAST SUPPER                                                      231

THE ADORATION OF THE MAGI                                            232

NEOPTOLEMY SACRIFICES POLYZEMA                                       233

TIME AND TEMPERANCE RESTRAIN CUPID                                   234

ULYSSES ACCEPTS THE PRESENTS OF ALCINOUS                             235

PENELOPE RECOGNISES ULYSSES                                          236

COURTIERS PRESENTING THEMSELVES BEFORE A KING                        237

CHILDREN PLAYING--XVITH CENTURY                                      238

DEATH OF CLEOPATRA                                                   239

PORTRAIT OF A WOMAN                                                  240

CALCHAS OF AGAMEMNON                                                 241

A GROVE                                                              242

ON THE BANKS OF A RIVER                                              243

PRINCE BALTAZAR CARLOS                                               244

ALLEGORY OF THE TIBER AND ROME                                       245

IMPERIAL FUNERAL BED OF STATE                                        246

ROYAL ARMS OF PHILIP V.                                              247

PANELS                                                               248

A FRIEZE                                                             249

BORDERS OF TAPESTRIES                                                250

THE PASSION OF OUR LORD                                              251

DEATH OF ABSALOM                                                     252

THE BIRTH OF CHRIST                                                  253

DESCENT FROM THE CROSS                                               254

ST. GREGORY’S MASS                                                   255

TRIUMPH OF JOSEPH                                                    256

KING CHARLES III.                                                    257

QUEEN AMELIA AND SAXONY                                              258

MYTHOLOGICAL SUBJECT                                                 259

AFTER THE VICTORY                                                    260

THE TEMPLE                                                           261

THE COLONNADE                                                        262

THE PALACE                                                           263

FRAGMENTS                                                            264

PANELS                                                               265

PANELS AFTER ANDRES DE AGUIRRE                                       266

PANELS AFTER TENIERS                                                 267

FRAGMENTS AFTER TENIERS                                              268

FRAGMENTS AFTER TENIERS                                              269

PANELS AFTER TENIERS                                                 270

FRAGMENTS AFTER TENIERS                                              271

FRAGMENTS AFTER TENIERS                                              272

CHILDREN PLAYING, AFTER GOYA                                         273

PANELS AFTER GOYA                                                    274

PANELS AFTER GOYA AND BAYEU                                          275

PANELS AFTER GOYA AND BAYEU                                          276

CORIOLANUS AND HIS MOTHER                                            277




THE SPANISH ROYAL TAPESTRIES




CHAPTER I

HISTORY OF THE ART OF TAPESTRY WEAVING


The term tapestry is often applied to any hangings of mediæval
workmanship whether woven on a frame or not. This use of the word is
incorrect. Tapestry is a fabric woven with coloured wools on to warp
threads in a loom or frame, in which the weft completely conceals the
warp. It is woven all in one piece. This distinguishes it from
embroidery or other needlework to which stitches are added after the
groundwork of the fabric has been detached from the frame. The worker
weaves directly from a design or cartoon which is supplied to him.

Tapestry frames are of two kinds. In the first the warp threads are
arranged in a perpendicular frame, and the weaver sits before his work.
This is known as high-warp (_haute lisse_) weaving, and is the method
in use at the celebrated manufactory at Gobelins in France. In the other
method the warp threads are stretched horizontally, and the weaver must
bend over his work. This is known as low-warp (_basse lisse_) weaving,
and is the process followed at Beauvais. On the whole the high warp
weaving gives a fabric of firmer and finer texture.

The rest of the process is precisely similar. The weft threads of
different colours, each attached to a separate bobbin or shuttle, are
passed alternately behind and in front of the warp threads, leaving a
little dot of colour behind. The second thread will, of course, take up
the warp thread the first has passed over, and pass in front of that
which the first one has passed behind. The two threads are then pushed
together with a comb until they fall into one straight line. The warp is
now completely concealed.

Tapestry weaving is an art that stands alone. Like furniture, tapestry
was of utilitarian origin, and cannot, therefore, be judged by the
standards applied to painting and the purely decorative arts. As
originally used in ancient buildings, it was hung some feet from the
walls to serve as a draught screen, or was suspended between pillars to
shut off one apartment from another. It was generally hung, therefore,
in undulating folds, the stiff panels and upholsteries of later
workmanship being a spurious growth.

The decorative value of such hangings was, of course, seized on at once
by the wealthy, who alone could afford them, and from the earliest times
tapestries became things of beauty. But in estimating their artistic
value we have to remember their original use. A tapestry curtain woven
with a symmetrical central design would appear quite distorted when
pushed aside by some one entering a room. Central unity, therefore, the
great merit of painting, is in tapestry artistically bad. The designs
that are most suitable are duplicated or repeated designs, with a
crowded background. These will secure a certain uniformity in the
suspended fabric. For this reason, therefore, such panels as Raphael’s
_Acts of the Apostles_, though fine specimens of pictorial art, are, as
tapestries, artistically faulty, beautiful though they are when
considered merely as works of art.

Its first utilitarian purpose being fulfilled, tapestry becomes a
decorative art designed only to please and rest the eye. Tragic
subjects, therefore, such as the _Descent from the Cross_ and the
_Passion of Our Lord_, are unsuitable, though they constantly tempted
the mediæval _tapissier_. Much finer are those works that depict
stirring historical scenes, the _Triumphs of Cæsar_ or the _Conquest of
Tunis_, or those which deal with light mythological subjects with their
pleasantly crowded backgrounds of fruit, flowers, and cupids. Dull and
sombre colourings are also bad. The richest dyes, enriched with metallic
threads of gold and silver, should glow against the background of the
cold stone pillars. All these æsthetic rules, however, were constantly
violated by the mediæval artificers, who could not rid themselves of the
idea that art in any form should be didactic, and subserve the purposes
of the Church and morality.

Tapestry weaving is certainly one of the most ancient of all the arts.
Fragments have been left behind by all the early civilizations to bear
witness to their skill. The art was practised by the early Egyptians,
the Babylonians, Chinese, and Peruvians, while the Greeks and Romans
brought it to a high state of perfection. It is noticeable that from the
very beginning the texture of the fabric has scarcely altered, while the
modern tapestry looms are but the natural development of the primitive
frames used by the ancient Egyptians.

The earliest specimen of weaving that has been discovered was found in
one of the Swiss lake dwellings, and can only be a relic of the later
Stone Age. Fragments somewhat similar have come to light in stone
coffins found in Yorkshire, while at Thornton, near Kolding, in Jutland,
whole costumes have been discovered that must have belonged to the Age
of Bronze.

The first historic references to the art come to us from early Egypt.
Here the weavers were probably women. The Beni Hassan wall-paintings,
which date from about 1600 B.C., depict weavers squatting at horizontal
low-warp frames. There are three fragments of this early tapestry
preserved in the Museum of Egyptian Antiquities at Cairo. Their
uniformly fine workmanship proves that the weaving of tapestries had
been carried to a high degree of excellence in the reign of Thothmes
III. The texture of the fabric is very fine, and the pattern is
identical on both sides. Some elasticity of pattern has been achieved by
the occasional slackening of warp threads. This points to a loom where
the threads were weighted, but not fastened to a cylinder.

A Greek vase found at Chiusi shows Penelope weaving at a high-warp frame
while she holds her suitors at bay. This belongs to the fifth century
B.C., and the loom depicted is very like those used in Scandinavian
countries.

Catullus speaks of tapestries that showed the adventures of Theseus and
Ariadne. The figures of Britons were constantly being reproduced in
Roman tapestries. In Rome there were organized societies of weavers
known as _collegii opificum_. The fabrics that have been preserved are
woven in coloured woollens and linen threads. They show a wealth of
floral and leaf adornment, and figures of ducks and fishes. One shows a
child riding a white horse; another portrays Hermes with his caduceus.
These date from the second or third centuries A.D.

The growth of Christianity, and the breaking up of Roman civilization,
drove the art of tapestry weaving into monasteries and convents, or to
the royal courts. It was not until the eleventh century that
associations of free craftsmen--as against the early organizations of
slaves--began to be formed in different countries. The movement started
in England, Flanders, and Brabant, and afterwards spread to France,
where this particular form of art was to find so congenial a home.

The Golden Age of mediæval tapestry opened, however, in the thirteenth
century when Raphael began his cartoons. This introduction of realism,
the widening of the whole artistic range, was rendered more feasible by
the discovery of new dyes which added richer and more glowing tints to
the fabrics. The borders, which had previously been simple, grew wider
and more elaborate in design. From this ever-increasing elaboration of
the borders, indeed, it is often possible to fix the date of an
otherwise dubious specimen.

In the following century Arras became the centre of the industry. So
closely was the tapestry associated with its place of manufacture that
in England the name of the town became synonymous for the name of the
fabric, and the arras became a recognized decoration of luxurious rooms.
From early times there are references in Spanish inventories to _pan de
raz_. This supremacy remained unchallenged until the fifteenth century
when Brussels and Bruges achieved fame as tapestry centres. In the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries the industry took root at
Middleburg, Delft, and Paris, and Mortlake in England became a famous
centre in the seventeenth century.

It was not until the late seventeenth century that tapestry weaving
really became established in Spain. Before that the Spanish kings and
nobles had been content to acquire masterpieces of foreign workmanship,
chiefly from the Low Countries. There are, however, traces of a feeble
industry to be found as far back as the late fourteenth century when one
man seems to have followed the craft of _tapissier_ in Catalonia. It is
possible--but not certain--that two _tapissiers_ of Navarre, who
flourished about 1411--Llucia Barthomew and Juan Noyan--may have been
Spaniards. Another Barthomew is spoken of a few years later in connexion
with two tapestries, namely, those of the _Resurrection_ and _St.
Anthony_.

A panel of Spanish tapestry, obviously intended for altar decoration,
has recently been discovered that dates from the early fifteenth
century. The centre is occupied by the figure of John the Baptist
bearing the Paschal Lamb, flanked by St. Martin of Tours in the dress of
a bishop, and by St. Hugh of Grenoble. Gold and silver threads are
employed, and the arms are shown of Martin of Aragon and of his wife,
Maria de Luna, who died in 1407. This king appears to have interested
himself in tapestries, and we read that the walls of the royal palace at
Saragossa were adorned with these costly fabrics at his coronation in
1398. King John of Aragon before him had introduced, we read in a
document dated 1388, a company of “brobadors de Brabant.”

From the fifteenth century onward the costliest tapestries were much
sought after in Spain, and magnificent displays were made on the
occasions of State banquets or royal weddings. Towards the end of the
fifteenth century a special official was appointed by the king to take
charge of the royal collection, which was already considerable. This
official, Pedro Entierrez by name, was himself a weaver. He made
strenuous efforts to develop the industry in the Spanish capital, but
apparently without much success. At any rate, a letter of his is
preserved among the records of the Spanish Academy of History, in which
he complains bitterly of the treatment meted out to himself and his
fellow-workers. He was accused by his enemies of being ambitious,
unskilled, and slow. These aspersions he proceeds very fully to refute.
He complains that his supplies of raw material were limited, and that he
was not allowed to set up his heavier instruments in Madrid.

It was not, however, until 1624 that the attempt to graft the weaving of
tapestry on to Spanish art really succeeded. In this year a small colony
of Flemish weavers settled in the little town of Pastran in New Castile,
being directly subsidized by the king. Five thousand ducats were paid to
them in the first year, and in the following year they received a
further seven thousand ducats.

Meantime the unfortunate Pedro Entierrez had found a rival in a certain
Antonio Ceron who had set up looms at Santa Isabel. Here he established
four workshops, and instructed eight apprentices in the art of weaving
tapestry. It is probably one of these ateliers that has been
immortalized by Velazquez in _Las Hilanderas_. This painting shows in
the background a tapestry of mythological inspiration, while in the
foreground women are seen unwinding skeins of wool.

For some time the poverty of the Spanish Crown held the industry in
check. But by 1720 a family of Spanish weavers from Antwerp, consisting
of one Jacques Van der Goten and his four sons, came over on the
invitation of Philip V and established an atelier in Madrid, where
tapestry was produced on low-warp frames. A few years later high-warp
looms were introduced from France, and the industry spread to Seville.
Some famous pieces were wrought in Spain at this time. Jacques Van der
Goten produced the _Virgin with the Pearl_ from a cartoon by Raphael,
while the famous series representing the _Conquest of Tunis_, and the
_History of Telemachus_, were reproduced by a well-known weaver called
Andrea Procaccini. Cartoons were also designed by Procaccini for a
“History of Don Quixote,” which have been constantly reproduced in
tapestry.

The fashion changed, and for a time the demand was all for Dutch
tapestries. Van der Goten set his workmen to copy the cartoons of
Solimena Teniers and the other Dutch cartoonists. But at the same time
original designs were not neglected, and by the end of the eighteenth
century the industry had become quite considerable, employing
permanently no less than fifteen workmen. The last of the Van der Goten
brothers died in 1786, and the direction of the Santa Barbara atelier
passed to a nephew.

The culmination of the prosperity of the Spanish _tapissiers_ was marked
by the execution of the celebrated Goya tapestries. These cartoons, to
the number of forty-five, were designed for the decoration of the
apartments of the Prince of Asturias in the Prado. Some of them,
however, are to be found on the walls of the Escorial, and many,
unhappily, have been lost. Goya brought to his task his own peculiar
talents. Hitherto the designers of cartoons had been content to find
their inspiration in ancient Bible stories or in the myths of Greece or
Rome. They had depicted incidents from the life of Christ and the
Virgin Mary; they had painted moralities, virtues, and vices. Goya did
none of these things. When he was summoned from Rome to Madrid by
Raphael Mengs, then the director of the workrooms of the Spanish
capital, he decided to portray in tapestry the actual life of the people
around him. In place of the stilted, conventional figures of his
predecessors he produced cartoons instinct with life and vivid movement.
The enthralling realism of the bull-fight, village fairs and festivals,
the romantic loves of Andalusian peasants, the popular excitement of
kite-flying--these were the subjects treated by this most realistic of
artists.

Goya achieved an immediate success. Time after time his cartoons were
reproduced by the Spanish weavers. The King, pleased at the distinction
with which the artist invested his Court, spent enormous sums upon
tapestries, and encouraged his household to do the same. In the four
years from 1776 to 1780 the sum of 817,956 _reales_ was expended at the
Court on the purchase of tapestries and cartoons. Other well-known
artists contributed cartoons to the Madrid workshops, among whom we find
the names of Van Loo, Conrado, Giaquinto, Mengs, Jose de Castillo,
Antonio Gonzalez, Mariano Nani, Andres Gines, Antonio Barbaza, and Jose
de Salas.

The French invasion caused the closing down of the workshops of Santa
Barbara in 1808. Some years later they were reopened by the son of St.
Ferdinand’s weaver, and once again beautiful fabrics were woven from the
designs of Goya. The death of Ferdinand VII in 1833 gave a severe blow
to the industry, but there are still looms in Santa Barbara where
exquisite tapestries are executed under the direction of a descendant of
Jacques Van der Goten.




CHAPTER II

THE FOUNDATION OF THE SPANISH ROYAL COLLECTION


In order to understand how the finest collection of Renaissance
tapestries in the world came to be in the royal palace at Madrid, it is
necessary to know something of the complicated history of the
Netherlands during the later fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, when the
Flemish tapestry weaving industry was at the height of its reputation.

During the earlier decades of the fifteenth century the Dukes of
Burgundy were employed in the consolidation of their power by the
acquisition of province after province in the Low Countries. By 1443
these territories included, in addition to the French duchy of Burgundy,
Flanders, Artois, Namur, Holland, Zeeland, Friesland, Brabant, Limbourg,
and the duchy of Luxembourg, and Burgundy had to be reckoned with as a
great European power. The Court of Philip the Good was, indeed, the most
luxurious in Europe, enriched with the finest paintings, the rarest
books, and the most beautiful tapestries. Charles the Bold added Liége
and Gelderland to the territories inherited from his father. On his
death in 1477, Burgundy, Franche Comté, and Artois reverted to France.
The rest of Charles’s dominions passed to his daughter Mary, who married
Maximilian of Austria. On Maximilian’s election as Emperor, he made his
son, Philip the Handsome, ruler of the Netherlands. The marriage of
Philip with Joanna of Aragon secured to their son Charles the kingdoms
of Aragon and Castile. On Charles’s election as Emperor in 1519, in
succession to his grandfather Maximilian, he united the sovereignties of
Spain and of the Netherlands.

Margaret of Austria had already been appointed by Maximilian as ruler of
the Netherlands. In this position the new Emperor left her, showing
therein great wisdom, as Margaret proved a popular ruler. On her death
he appointed his widowed sister, Mary of Hungary, as her successor.
Under the beneficent rule of these two Burgundian ladies, the industry
of tapestry weaving flourished and reached its height. The Netherlands
enjoyed a long term of peace and prosperity. Both Margaret of Austria
and Mary of Hungary were enthusiastic patrons of the art, and many
well-known series of tapestries were woven at their command. These
pieces passed, almost without exception, into the hands of Charles V and
Philip II on the death of their original owners. During the long and
bitter struggle against the Catholic Philip, the industry, as was
inevitable, languished and never again recovered its ancient vigour.

It has been asserted that the Spanish kings used their power in the
Netherlands to extort from the weavers the finest products of their
looms by blackmail, or even torture. There seems to be little
foundation, if any, for this charge. With one exception, where the
origin of the tapestries is known, they were acquired by inheritance or
purchase, or were made, as in the case of the _Conquest of Tunis_,
directly to the royal command.

Besides the tapestries dealt with in the following pages the Spanish
royal collection contains an even greater number of pieces of less
importance and artistic value, disposed upon the walls of the palace.
These also are almost entirely of Flemish origin, except those which
were the product, at a later date, of the Spanish looms established by
the much persecuted Van der Goten. A large number of the tapestries here
described were shown at the Paris Exhibition of 1900, when, for the
first time, the world became aware of the artistic wealth so long hidden
in the Royal Palace of Madrid.

The accumulated treasures of the Spanish Court had remained for many
years neglected and uncatalogued, their history and origin uncertain or
unknown. It was King Alfonso XII who first conceived the idea of
arranging the royal tapestries, studying their history, discovering,
where possible, their designers and makers, and classifying them into
groups and series, and making photographs of the whole collection. This
work was subsequently completed by the late Queen Isabella of Spain.

In 1903 an excellent series of photographic plates representing the
finest of the tapestries was published in book form, accompanied by
critical and historical notes from one of the finest art critics of
Spain--the Count Valencia de Don Juan. It is to this learned and
discerning writer that I am most indebted for the explanatory notes
which accompany the reproductions included in this volume. The
tapestries are, as far as possible, treated in groups connected by
similarity of subject except where several pieces form a continuous
series.




CHAPTER III

THE GOTHIC TAPESTRIES--SACRED PIECES


It is a notable fact that the earlier Gothic tapestries--those of the
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries and earlier--nearly all deal with
religious subjects. From this we are apt to acquire an exaggerated idea
of the part played by religion in mediæval life. The true explanation is
that in the cockpit of Europe during these fierce and warlike times art
in any form found itself unable to exist. Only in the monasteries could
it find refuge, and these became the centres, not only of the fine arts,
but also of textile arts like tapestry-weaving. The effects of this
monopoly were unfortunate. The imagination of the designers of cartoons
was stunted. They came to believe that the duty of tapestry was not to
delight the eye, but to preach trite little sermons. Hence the endless
series of pictures extolling the practice of vices. The chief beauty of
the earlier Gothic tapestries lay in the brilliance and richness of the
dyes. But as the times became less barbarous, and art began to flourish
outside the monastery and the cathedral close, the Gothic tapestries
gained a new vigour and beauty. The religious inspiration remained,
giving, indeed, an atmosphere of chastened restraint that to many people
denotes the high-water mark of the art. But the incursions of the outer
world could no longer be restrained, and we get the delightful posies of
spring flowers, the bluebells, daisies, lilies, and primroses--the
_millefleurs_--all utterly irrelevant and charming, that intrude into
fierce battle scenes and into the mystic visions of the Apocalypse.

All the Gothic tapestries in the Spanish royal collection are of Flemish
workmanship.


GROUP 1, including _The Birth of Christ_ and _The Mass of St. Gregory
the Great_

_The Birth of Christ_ is probably one of the oldest pieces of the whole
collection. It is mentioned for the first time as forming part of the
collection left by Juana the Mad, who died at Tordesillas in 1555.
Neither the designer nor the weaver can be identified. “The Gothic
architecture of the buildings in the background,” says the Count
Valencia de Don Juan, “the attitude of the persons, the singularity and
richness of their costumes, and, above all, the drawing, recalls the
tapestries which were made at Arras in the fifteenth century.”

The tapestry represents the birth of Christ in fulfilment of the
prophecies of the Prophets Isaiah and Micah, and of Aaron the High
Priest of the Israelites. The scroll to the left by the figure of Micah
bears the legend (translated into English), “And thou, Bethlehem
Ephrata, art small among the cities of Judah, nevertheless out of thee
shall come forth He that is to be the Ruler in Israel” (Micah v. 2).
That to the right bears the (translated) inscription, “For a child is
born to us, and a Son is given to us, and the Government is upon His
shoulder; and His name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, God ...”
etc. (Isaiah ix. 6).

This tapestry is made of silk and wool interwoven with gold threads. It
was probably used as an altar piece. Two pieces of red and gold brocade,
of much later workmanship, have been added.

_The Mass of St. Gregory the Great._ Neither the designer of the cartoon
nor the town where this tapestry was woven is known. It is of Flemish
origin, and the Gothic arches, each enclosing a scene in the life of
Christ, point to Bruges as its place of origin. It is mentioned by
Ferdinand V of Aragon in the Act of Discharge of Juan Valazquez (1555)
as a gift from the Princess Juana to her mother, Queen Isabel the
Catholic.

The tapestry shows the celebration of Mass by St. Gregory the Great in
the presence of King David and St. Augustine. The scroll to the left
bears the (translated) inscription, “Man shall eat the bread of angels.”
That on the right reads, “The sacrament is the outward visible form of
the invisible Grace.”

This tapestry is woven in silks and wool enriched by threads of gold and
silver.


GROUP 2. _The Story of the Holy Virgin_

_1st Series._ Consists of four pieces which once bore in the corner as a
heraldic mark a small lion embroidered in gold on a black ground.
Cartoons said to be by Van Eyck. Of Flemish origin, probably belonging
to the Bruges atelier.

These tapestries belonged to Philip the Handsome and Juana the Mad.
Transferred by Charles V to the monastery of Yuste, and again removed by
Philip II to the monastery of the Escorial, they were in constant use
for the religious ceremonies attended by the Royal Household owing to
their unusual beauty.

The first piece represents God commanding the Archangel Gabriel to
announce her destiny to the Virgin Mary.

The second piece represents the Annunciation.

The third piece represents the Birth of Christ.

The fourth piece represents the Coronation of the Holy Virgin.

_2nd Series._ In spite of the similarity of the borders the two
tapestries here treated do not form a continuous series with those
previously described. They probably came from workrooms of Brussels.
Designer and weaver unknown, but resemblance has been noted between the
figures of Adam and Eve and similar figures on a triptych designed by
the brothers Van Eyck.

The subjects of these two tapestries are obscure. They appear, however,
to refer--

First, to the fulfilment of the prophecies as to the birth of the Son of
God;

Secondly, to the presentation of Jesus in the Temple.

All these tapestries are of extraordinary beauty. They are woven of silk
and wool enriched with gold and silver threads.


GROUP 3. _The Story of David and Bathsheba_ (10 Tapestries)

Three of these tapestries are mentioned in the _Inventaire des Rois
Catholiques_ under the heading “Bed,” having evidently formed part of
the draperies of a bed belonging to some royal personage. These are of
Flemish origin and date from the end of the fifteenth century. They are
woven in silk, wool, and gold thread.

To these were later added seven bed canopies of Gothic design. The
subjects of the tapestries are as follows:

(1) David surprises Bathsheba in her bath and falls in love with her
beauty. For the sake of modesty, however, the artist has represented
Bathsheba fully clothed, washing her hands at a small fountain.

(2) The Marriage of David and Bathsheba. David, from being a
smooth-faced boy, has become a bearded man.

(3) The prophet Nathan reproaches David with his evil ways.

The remaining seven tapestries apparently represent some sylvan festival
in which courtiers make offerings of fruit and flowers to ladies. The
playing-cards are worth noticing.




CHAPTER IV

TAPESTRIES OF THE GOTHIC-RENAISSANCE TRANSITION


The fifteenth century saw Gothic tapestries carried to their highest
point of perfection. Bruges had become a centre of pictorial art next
only to Italy. Memling, the Van Eycks, and Bernard Van Orley were giving
life, freedom, and originality to the old stilted Gothic forms in
painting, and it was to them that the art of tapestry weaving owed its
greatest debt.

But to the Flemish weavers themselves no small part of the artistic
merit of the Gothic tapestries is to be ascribed. The master-weaver was
an artist, not a craftsman. To him the designer left many details of
design; he was at liberty to alter cartoons that could not be
satisfactorily translated into tapestry, to choose colourings, even to
introduce new figures into the picture. In the fifteenth century the
_tapissiers_ were still conscientious, refusing to hurry their work to
the detriment of its quality. Artist and _tapissier_ alike, now perfect
masters of the art, spent their time perfecting the methods that had
made the name of Flemish tapestry in the preceding century. The
tapestries described in the following pages belong to this period, just
before the spirit of the Italian Renaissance completely banished the old
native forms of art from the north of Europe. The first cartoons of
Raphael were still to come to the Flemish workshops, but already men
were talking of the wonders of Italy, and certain signs of transition
are strongly marked in the tapestries with which we are dealing. In many
the Gothic architecture of the background has given way to Renaissance,
and the sky-line has been lowered. Or sometimes while the background
remains under the Gothic inspiration, the treatment of the figures, more
especially of the robes, shows the Renaissance influence. The chief
characteristics that distinguish these tapestries from the earlier
Gothic are the greater freedom in the attitudes of the figures, the
perfection of detail, and the absence of exaggeration, particularly in
the patterns of fabrics and of dress ornaments.


GROUP 4. _The Story of St. John the Baptist_

Date and origin uncertain, but evidently belong to the transition
period. The figures show the realism and elegance of the Italian
painters, while the buildings in the background are Gothic. The
tapestries show different episodes in the life of the Saint. The
similarity of their exquisitely woven borders suggests that they belong
to the same series. They are woven in fine wool, silk, gold, and silver.
The subjects are as follows:

(1) Visit of the Holy Virgin to her cousin Elizabeth. Zaccharius
recovers his speech.

(2) The child John asks permission to devote himself to God.

(3) St. John, asked by the Pharisee if he is the Christ, replies:
“Behold the Lamb of God.”

(4) He baptizes Jesus and many others. End of the reign of the Jews.


GROUP 5. _The Passion of Our Lord_ (2 Episodes)

These two tapestries, richly woven in gold, silk, and wool, were made by
command of Princess Margaret of Austria, the Regent of the Netherlands.
These were inherited by her nephew Charles V. They are mentioned in an
inventory that Margaret caused to be made in 1525, five years before her
death.

The designer of the cartoons is unknown. The background is Gothic, but
the figures show Italian influence.

_Tapestry No. 1._ Christ bearing the Cross on His way to Calvary meets
St. Veronica, who receives the sacred imprint on her handkerchief.

_Tapestry No. 2._ The Descent from the Cross.


GROUP 6. _Moralities_ (4 Tapestries)

These belong to the end of the fifteenth or the beginning of the
sixteenth century, and were inspired by the preaching of the Reformers.

The first three tapestries of the group are the sole remaining pieces
from an older series executed during the transition from the older
Gothic style to the new style of the Italian Renaissance. Their exact
date is unknown. They were bought by the Princess Marie of Portugal as
part of her dowry on her marriage with Philip II. They are enriched by
gold threads.

The fourth tapestry in this group is the only surviving specimen of
another older series.


_St. Jerome_

Dates from the middle of the sixteenth century. Woven in gold, silk, and
wool on high warp. In possession of Philip II of Spain when inventory
was made in 1598. The plate represents the penance of St. Jerome.


GROUP 7. _Dais of Emperor Charles V_ (3 Tapestries)

These tapestries of silk, gold, and wool were made by command of the
Regent Margaret of Austria, at Brussels, under the direction of Pierre
Pannemaker, the most famous _tapissier_ of the time. The cartoons were
probably by the aged painter Quintin Metoys. The tapestries were begun
in 1523, and passed to the Emperor on the death of Margaret.

_Tapestry No. 1._ The bed canopy represents the Eternal Father and the
Holy Ghost surrounded by Seraphim.

_Tapestry No. 2._ The Redemption of mankind from the taint of original
sin.

_Tapestry No. 3._ Formed the lower part of the dais, and depicts St.
Luke xxiv. 50, 51.


GROUP 8. _The Passion of Our Lord_ (4 Tapestries)

These four tapestries were woven by Pierre Pannemaker from the designs
of Quintin Metoys at the command of Margaret of Austria. They are good
examples of the transition style, and some fine effects of tinting have
been obtained by means of hatching (i.e. the use of vertical lines to
give thickness to the figures). The influence of Roger Van der Weyden is
plain.

These tapestries were inherited by Charles V from Margaret of Austria,
and have been much used for State functions.

_Tapestry No. 1._ Represents the prayer on the Mount of Olives.

_Tapestry No. 2._ Meeting between Our Lord and the Virgin on the road to
Calvary.

_Tapestry No. 3._ The Crucifixion.

_Tapestry No. 4._ The Descent from the Cross.


GROUP 9. _Vices and Virtues_ (9 Tapestries)

These tapestries were probably executed at Brussels in the first half of
the sixteenth century. They are woven in silk, gold thread, and wool,
cover a surface of 400 square metres, and include a thousand figures.

Though much in the style of Bernard van Orley, the absence of the rich
Renaissance architecture in which that painter delighted suggests that
either Jean Gossaert or Quintin Metoys was more likely the designer.
There is no weaver’s mark on the tapestry. A reproduction must have been
made in wool and silk, as one piece representing the Punishment of Vice
was exhibited in Bruges by the Prince of Aremberg. The series is
mentioned in the inventory of Charles V, dated Brussels, 1544, and was
alleged to have been purchased in Seville.

The excellence of the tapestries is mostly due to the _tapissiers_. The
overcrowded canvases, the painfully didactic and tortuous morals, do not
rank the designs very high. That labelled “Infamy” gives a key to the
complicated moral problem. The beholder is urged in a pompous and wordy
harangue to follow reason and the philosophers, so shall no evil befall
him. The different pieces represent respectively, Faith, Honour, Renown,
Nobility, Fortune, Infancy, Prudence, Vice, and Justice.


GROUP 10. _The Foundation of Rome_ (6 Tapestries)

A fine example of Flemish tapestry probably executed from cartoons by
Bernard van Orley, the pupil of Raphael. The Italian influence is
strong, yet the tapestry is hardly pure Renaissance. There is no
weaver’s mark, so the series must date prior to 1528. The tapestries are
remarkable for their fine landscapes, the magnificence of the buildings,
and the elegance of the costumes. The borders are of beautiful design
and workmanship.

_Tapestry No. 1._ Shows Romulus and Remus thrown into the Tiber. They
are suckled by a she-wolf and grow up to be clever hunters and cunning
thieves.

_Tapestry No. 2._ Remus, taken captive, is presented to Amielius, who is
killed by the brothers. Numitor is placed on the throne.

_Tapestry No. 3._ The brothers trace out the foundations of Rome with a
plough. Romulus becomes king, gives his name to the city, and kills his
brother.

_Tapestry No. 4._ Romulus proclaims a fête to Neptune, to attract young
girls from neighbouring districts.

_Tapestry No. 5._ The rape of the Sabine women. Hersilia is presented to
Romulus. The Sabine parents retire disconsolate.

_Tapestry No. 6._ Romulus gives laws to the people. He establishes the
twelve lictors, summons the Senate, and builds a temple.


GROUP II. _The Conquest of Tunis_ (12 Tapestries)

This series of tapestries, besides being of peculiar historical
importance, is one of the very finest examples of the perfected
Gothic-Renaissance school, and is worth noticing in much fuller detail
than any others of the collection. Designed by Jan Vermay, or Vermeyen,
and woven by Wilhelm Pannemaker, it was directly inspired by Charles
himself, who determined to leave to posterity this magnificent record of
an expedition of the success of which he can have felt no doubt.
Vermeyen was commanded to accompany the Emperor, so that on the actual
battlefield he might reproduce in pencil the stirring scenes that passed
before his eyes.

Detailed instructions were given to the artist as to the manner in which
his cartoons were to be designed. He bound himself to submit small
sketches for Charles’ approval, to carry out any alterations and
suggestions made by his patron, and finally to reproduce them “in the
best and most vivid colours,” in the size that was required for the
actual tapestries. The Emperor agreed to pay for them the sum of 1800
florins, a considerable amount according to the standards of the time.

To Wilhelm Pannemaker, the famous Flemish weaver, was entrusted the
weaving of the tapestries. Determined that neither poverty of material
nor careless workmanship should spoil the precious webs, Charles and his
sister Mary of Hungary bound Pannemaker by a stringent contract, wherein
the amount and quality of silk, and the number and value of the gold and
silver threads were distinctly specified. The gold was to come from
Milan, the silk from Granada. The finest wool was also commanded and the
richest dyes. In order that the slow process of tapestry weaving might
be expedited as much as possible, Pannemaker was to have seven men
working at each tapestry. Each piece as it was finished was to be
scrutinized by experts, whose corrections Pannemaker bound himself to
follow, even if it should necessitate remaking the whole piece. The
dyeing of the silk and wool required was specially undertaken in an
unusual range of colours. We find a certain Louis Chausset, complaining
that he had lost 160 pounds of fine silk that were spoilt while being
tinted blue.

After the last alterations had been made the tapestries were declared
definitely to be completed on April 21, 1554. They were sent to England
to be exhibited at the wedding of Philip and Mary, and afterwards
conducted with the utmost care back to Spain. For some time they were
shown constantly at all great Court functions till the Emperor, fearful
of the result of such constant wear, ordered a smaller set to be
prepared. In 1740 Philip V had another reproduction made of the same
size as the originals. Yet another copy exists in the Museum at Vienna.
This was made by the Austrians who, when they succeeded the Spaniards,
discovered the first ten cartoons and purchased them. Another tapestry
was woven by Pannemaker that combined the subjects of Nos. 7 and 8 in
this series. This was found by the Maréchal de Contades in a castle near
Mechlin during the Seven Years’ War between France and Germany.


THE EXPEDITION AGAINST TUNIS

On the death of Mohammed the Hafsite in 1525, Khain-ad-Din Barbarossa
took advantage of a dispute over the succession, to occupy Algiers in
the name of the Sultan of Constantinople. The wars in Italy gave him the
opportunity of consolidating his territories in the north of Africa,
where he succeeded in establishing his dominion firmly, making Algiers
his capital. At the end of the second Italian war Barbarossa swooped
down on a small island in the possession of the Spaniards, and connected
it with the mainland. From this stronghold he planned a series of
brilliant coups that made him a serious menace to the kingdom of Naples
and Sicily. He attacked and overthrew the native Tunisian dynasty under
the pretence of restoring the rightful ruler, made himself master of
this city as he had done of Algiers, and pushed his successes far into
the interior. The menace was not lost upon Charles V. Availing himself
of the plea for help urged by Al-Hasan, the son of Mohammed, the Emperor
decided upon the conquest of Tunis and set sail from Barcelona on May
30, 1535.

Never was any expedition more popular. The Spanish people swarmed into
Barcelona to bid God-speed to the departing fleet. At Cagliari Charles
was joined by Doria with a company of German and Italian troops, galleys
from Sicily and southern Italy, and a number of Knights Hospitallers
enrolled to attack the infidel.

Goletta was selected as the first point of attack, so that the way might
be cleared to Tunis. After a desperate siege the fortress fell into
Charles’s hands, together with the whole corsair fleet of eighty-two
galleys. Still the attack on Tunis seemed fraught with too much danger,
and much against his will Charles decided to re-embark. At the last
moment, however, bolder counsels prevailed. The army was hastily formed
into advance-guard and rear-guard and started on its twelve-mile march
to Tunis.

Charles’s army certainly laboured under grave disadvantages. Their guns
had all to be dragged by hand; there were provisions for only five days.
Between olive groves and the lagoons they moved with a front of but one
thousand paces. The groves gave cover to the corsair chief as he moved
to outflank the Emperor’s troops. But in appalling heat the Spaniards
marched steadily forward. Barbarossa made two desperate attacks, but the
Spanish troops stood their ground. The second encounter resulted in
total defeat for the Moors and Turks, who recoiled before the deadly
fire of the Christians. Turning to re-enter the fortress of Tunis,
Barbarossa found it held by the Christian slaves who had risen against
him. Tunis was captured, and a heavy blow struck at the power and
prestige of the Turk.

A projected attack on Algiers had to be abandoned owing to the advancing
season. Bona and Biserta, however, were secured, and these together with
Goletta were retained by the Spaniards. Tunis itself Charles restored to
its one-time ruler, Al-Hassan, who had joined his army in time for the
march to the capital.

The result of this expedition was peculiarly fortunate for Charles. His
reputation as a daring and successful soldier was established; Naples
and Sicily looked on him as their saviour. All Europe admired the skill
with which he had disposed of the natural ally of the French and
checkmated Francis before that astute sovereign’s plans of attack had
matured.

Jan Vermay, or Vermeyen, the Flemish painter, chosen by Charles to
accompany him on his expedition to Tunis, was one of the best-known
artists of the first half of the sixteenth century. As Court painter
under Margaret of Austria he executed portraits of the Emperor and of
every one of importance at the Court, which were sent as gifts to the
different sovereigns of Europe. Later he became the special protégé of
Mary of Hungary, and afterwards of Charles himself.


THE TAPESTRIES

Each tapestry has an explanatory legend in Spanish at the top, and a
supplementary legend in Latin underneath. Translations of these have
been made for the first time by the Conde Valencia de Don Juan.

_Tapestry No. 1._ Shows a map of the shore of the Mediterranean, where
Charles embarked his army, and the opposite coasts of Africa. The
translation of the upper legend reads: “The Conqueror, wishing to
overcome the infidel armies of the Turk and the warrior who, obeying the
orders of Soliman, raises cruel wars against the realms of Spain,
Charles, the fifth of that name, with the blessing of heaven, gathers
together the armies and fleets of Spain and Italy to threaten the
African troops. He who knows not the meaning of delay, sails with his
loyal companions.” On the right the figure of Vermeyen upholds a chart
bearing the following curious inscription: “The conquest of Charles,
Emperor of the Romans, the fifth of that name, and first of the kings
of Spain, in Africa in 1535 had serious causes that the chronicles of
the time recount more fully in their histories. These causes being left
on one side, to this work is represented as exactly as possible the
course of events.” Since for a clear understanding it is necessary to
know the country where the events took place and what preparations had
been made, the action is treated in this tapestry according to nature
(all that concerns the cosmography leaving nothing to be desired). In
the distance the coasts of Africa (like those of Europe and its
boundaries) are seen with their chief ports, their broad gulfs, their
islands, their winds at exactly the same distances at which they really
lie (the author having taken much more care over their precise situation
than over the accuracy of the painting). As all has been done--as also
with the countries--in strict accordance with cosmography, and the
painter has observed the canons of his art, considering that the
spectator views it from Barcelona, where the embarkation for Tunis
began. This last town lies between the spectator and the Midi, leaving
the north behind, above the right shoulder. Accuracy being thus
established, the peculiarities of the other tapestries can be better
understood.

_Tapestry No. 2._ The upper legend declares that this piece represents
“the arrival of the Emperor at Barcelona with his army: the magnificence
of his brilliant body-guard, formed of gentlemen of his household and of
his Court, who accompanied him to share the dangers of the campaign:
included in his company are the Infante Louis, his half-brother, and
many other Portuguese gentlemen who formed part of the troops for the
expedition.”

The lower scroll bears the following inscription: “The Conqueror leaves
the outskirts of Madrid and the dwelling of his ancestors, and halts in
the smiling county of Barcelona. He reviews the army and singles out the
noblemen and knights. He vows at the moment of embarkation that in
crossing the ocean (leaving behind him the waves of the Balearic and
Sardinian Seas) that the fleet can come together in the place commanded.
He embarks with him the Germans, the Italian army, and the battalions of
Spanish veterans, and lands them on the African coast.”

_Tapestry No. 3._ According to the upper scroll this tapestry treats of
“the arrival of the Emperor and his galleys at old Carthage, and the
reconnaissance of Goletta (where several cannon shots were fired). On
June 16 the Conqueror disembarks with his body-guard and 12,000
infantry, and takes three positions. He attacks the towers of Water and
of Salt; the Spanish arquebusiers, under the order of the Marquis del
Vasto, draw on the enemy, who lose several men.”

The lower inscription reads: “Here they enter the port of Utica; ancient
Carthage receives them in her ruins. The fleet sails along the coast.
Thence the Conqueror goes with a small body-guard to explore Goletta and
to spy out its fortifications and situation. After having given the
order to the troops to disembark they light-heartedly attack the enemy,
who retreat. They pitch the camp beside the walls of what was once
Carthage the illustrious, and is to-day a village of poor cottages.” A
further inscription in the border reads: “This third piece must be
looked at from the place where the fleet is cruising along the coasts
from Porto Farina to the head of the promontory of Carthage; the north
is to the left side above the right shoulder.”

_Tapestry No. 4._ The upper inscription explains that “during the
landing of the rest of the army several skirmishes take place until the
Emperor orders the body of the army to descend into the plain to besiege
Goletta.” The Marquis del Vasto sends reinforcements with which they try
(without success) to surprise the enemy. The whole army being reunited,
the Turks, a few days after, try to gain an advantage from a violent
wind which arose, throwing sand with shovels and other instruments to
blind their enemies. But the wind suddenly falling, the Turks surrounded
by our arquebusiers were obliged to fall back to Goletta.

The Latin inscription at the foot reads: “Charles strikes the camp, and
when the army is already on the march the enemy attack the rear-guard
and harass their movements. The army faces round, and the enemy nearly
surrounded in a dangerous place, retreat. A violent wind arises, raising
whirlwinds of sand; our men are blinded by the dust. The enemy, full of
craft, appear again, throwing sand at our soldiers, and thus fighting as
much with dust as with arms; but when the wind falls they are repulsed.”

The inscription in the right-hand border instructs us to look from the
promontory to the camp and stop at the Water Tower, leaving the lagoon
on the right-hand and taking the north, on the same side.

_Tapestry No. 5._ The upper inscription describes “a sortie of Turks
from Goletta, and the killing of several Italian soldiers; a new sortie
of the Turks killing the Marquis de Final, an Italian colonel: the
arrival of Muley Hassan, King of Tunis, with 400 cavalry: the serious
skirmish in which the Marquis de Mondejas receives a blow from a lance:
the help brought by the Emperor: the flight of the enemy, losing part of
their artillery.”

The lower inscription reads: “The Turks make a sortie and repulse the
Italian advance-guard, whose leader is made prisoner; they take the
_tranchées_, but repulsed by the Spanish, they retire. Finally, counting
on the darkness of the night, they attack the Spaniards and force them
to abandon their _tranchées_; attacked in their turn, they are forced to
retire again. The king Hassan arrives, followed by a small body-guard.
The Marquis Louis, wounded, retires from the combat. Charles V arrives
with help when the soldiers are already in distress; he repulses the
enemy and takes their artillery.”

We are instructed to look at this tapestry “as though we were at the
towers of Water and of Salt opposite Goletta, having the sea and the
north on the left-hand, and the lagoon on the right.”

_Tapestry No. 7._ Represents the taking of Goletta: “Twenty thousand
Turks charge to take the tower of the promontory of Carthage, defended
by 26,000 Spaniards, protected by the Emperor with the Germans and new
Spanish troops. On land Goletta fights with 11 cannons; by sea 9
galleys, commanded by the Prince Doria, are supported by the galleon and
the carabels of the Portuguese, commanded by the Infante Louis. Goletta
is defended by 6000 Turks and 2000 Moors, with more than 400 guns. At
the attack, directed from the sea, there are 4000 soldiers of the
battalions of Spanish veterans, and in that, directed from the coast of
the lagoon, as many Italians and 2000 Germans. At the assault of
Goletta, 2000 Turks and Moors are killed, and about 100 of our men, dead
or wounded, are put out of action. The fleet commanded by Barbarossa is
taken also.”

The Latin text relates that “the garrison defending the Cape finds
itself threatened by an attack of the Africans. The Conqueror comes to
the rescue and repulses the assailants. Goletta is attacked by land and
sea; the enemy fights with arrows. Part of the wall, already undermined,
falls where the fight is fiercest. The Spanish troops enter first into
the breach; this being taken, they slay or put to flight the defenders,
while Charles deals with another section of the enemy.”

This piece is to be regarded “from the lagoon, with Tunis on the left
hand, the promontory of Carthage on the right, and the north behind to
the right.”

_Tapestry No. 8._ The original of this tapestry was lost during the
eighteenth century, shortly after the reproduction of the Tunis series
was undertaken at the command of Philip V. This represented the march
against Tunis of the Emperor and his troops, and the victory gained at
Los over Barbarossa, where 600 of the enemy were slain.

_Tapestry No. 9._ The upper inscription of this tapestry reads: “After
having scattered the enemy’s army and put to flight the captain,
Barbarossa, the Emperor, with his troops, advances on Tunis and occupies
the outskirts of the town. The Christians, held captive in the fortress,
rise and demand aid from the Marquis de Vasto. The place is taken and
the Emperor allows it to be sacked.” The Latin legend adds the following
details about the slaves: “Undermining the walls and breaking down the
doors, they have, with God’s help, abandoned their prison. Having
defeated the garrison they make themselves masters of the citadel and
implore help from the avenger, Charles. Haradin flies the town.”

The inscription in the border directs us that “we are looking towards
the lagoon, with Tunis in front, Goletta and the north behind.”

_Tapestry No. 10._ This represents “the sack of Tunis, hostilities
against those who offer resistance, and the imprisonment of a great
number of the enemy. The Conqueror delivers over the town to the King of
Tunis, who remains a vassal of the Emperor.”

The Latin text reads: “The troops sent against the outskirts of the town
lay siege to and take them, slaughter the enemy’s army, take the houses
and spare the inhabitants; as to the remainder, they use the rights of
conquest. More than 20,000 captives recover their liberty and salute,
with cries of gratitude, Charles the avenger. The Conqueror
re-establishes on the throne of his ancestors the unfortunate Hassan,
though he hardly merited this, since he had promised much and performed
little.”

_Tapestry No. 11._ This tapestry shared the fate of No. 8, being lost
during the eighteenth century. From the reproduction we find that it
represented the return of the army to Rada after the occupation of
Tunis, which lasted eight days. “The Emperor orders the Moors to bring
back their wives and children, and to bring the clothes taken by the
soldiers during the sack. In order to be recognized they are to carry on
their heads branches of olive. He also orders them to furnish the
Christians with the recovered vessels, so that they may return to their
respective countries.”

_Tapestry No. 12._ According to the upper inscription this deals with
“the return of the Emperor from Rada to Goletta: the encamping of the
army in the old place: the arrival of the King of Tunis to sign the
capitulation forcing him to be a tributary of the Emperor and his
successors: Goletta which he wishes to fortify, over which he sets
Bernardin de Mendoza as ruler, with 1000 Spaniards: the embarking of the
army towards the middle of the month of August: the departure of the
Infante Louis with the Portuguese fleet: that of the Marquis de
Mondejer: the vessels that accompanied him: departure of Don Alvano de
Bazan with the Spanish galleys: that of the Germans and the Italians for
their respective countries, and finally that of the Emperor with the
galleys of the Prince Doria.”

The Latin inscription is merely a résumé of the Spanish one.

This tapestry is to be looked at with Goletta and the Cape of Carthage
in front, Tunis on the left hand, the sea and the north to the right.


GROUP 12. _The Last Supper_ (1 Tapestry)

Woven from a design almost certainly of Bernard van Orley, the pupil of
Raphael, by Pierre Pannemaker at Brussels, in wool, silk, gold, and
silver. Purchased by Charles V at 38 florins--a higher price than that
generally paid for the same class of work. The tapestry was given by the
Emperor to his wife, and is considered one of the finest religious
pieces in the royal collection. It is used on Holy Thursdays to decorate
the famous Hall of Columns in the Palace, when the ceremony of the
Washing of Feet and the dinner to the poor take place.


GROUP 13. _The Descent of the Holy Ghost_ (1 Tapestry)

This tapestry is woven in silk and wool enriched with gold and silver
threads. Neither the designer nor the _tapissier_ are known, but from
the type of features represented, Count Valencia de Don Juan conjectures
that the artist was of Flemish blood. It is first mentioned in the
inventory made on the death of Charles II. The subject of the piece is
taken from Acts ii. 1-4


GROUP 14. _The Adoration of the Kings_ (1 Tapestry)

This is one of the finest of the religious tapestries in the collection
and was a particular favourite of the Emperor Charles V, who took it
with him on his retirement to Yuste. Both the design and workmanship are
Flemish, but the influence of the Italian school is perceptible. The
usual materials are employed--silk, wool, gold, and silver threads.

The border is particularly fine with its wealth of flowers, birds, and
fruits. At each corner is shown a medallion representing a scene from
the life of Christ.


GROUP 15. _The Story of Abraham_ (7 Tapestries)

These tapestries are attributed by Wauters to Wilhelm Pannemaker. Though
modified by Italian ideas the design is in the Flemish style. Woven in
silk and wool they were the property of the Princess Juana, the daughter
of Charles V. They show the characteristic determination of Gothic
_tapissiers_ to “tell the story” from beginning to end, from the time
that Abraham first leaves his country to journey into the land of
Canaan, to his death.


GROUP 16. _The Apocalypse_ (8 Tapestries)

The Revelations of St. John were a favourite subject with the mediæval
_tapissier_, yet strange to say there are few complete series remaining.
In the Cathedral at Angers is a series of sixty-seven pieces made in
1377 by Nicolas Bataille for Louis I of Anjou. A little later two other
series on the same subject were executed at Arras, one being destined
for Philip the Good. In time this came into the possession of Charles V,
and is mentioned in the Inventory of 1536. No further mention, however,
is made of this tapestry in any Spanish documents, and Pinchart
conjectures that it was probably lost in the fire that destroyed the
Palace of Brussels in 1731.

The series included in this collection was made by Wilhelm Pannemaker,
and purchased by Philip II. We find the following paragraph in the
discharge of the Treasurer-General in the year 1562:

“To Wilhelm Pannemaker, tapestry maker, who came from Flanders to bring
the Tapestry of the Apocalypse made for the service of H.M., sixty
thousand _maravedi_ which H.M. pays him all at once for the expenses of
his journey (from his own country whither he returns), as witness the
command of H.M., the 31st December, 1561. The said tapestry maker has
received the money the 31st of the said month.”

The tapestries are fine specimens woven in silk, wool, and gold thread.
M. Ouiffrey attributes the cartoons to Albert Dürer, but the Count
Valencia de Don Juan prefers to regard them as by an unknown artist
working under the influence of Dürer and Jean de Bruges. The designs are
very beautiful, more especially the borders, which are little
masterpieces of grace and elegance. The plates are explained by short
Latin legends in the middle of the upper border.

_Tapestry No. 1._ “St. John writes a true description of his vision to
the Bishop of the Seven Churches of Asia. He moralizes and instructs
them.”

_Tapestry No. 2._ “This great mystery illuminated by Divine Grace and
manifested in Christ the Saviour of Mankind. Those who have been made
pure by His Blood shall remain strong and shall not be turned from the
Holy way by the whirlwind.”

_Tapestry No. 3._ “The Gospel spreads through the world as to the sound
of trumpets. The Apostolic dogma and holy doctrine resounds in the
Temple, drives back sin, and plants a true love of the faith in every
spirit.”

_Tapestry No. 4._ “The fruits of virtue, precious for their works,
encourage the multitude of the elect; that which is watched over by the
jealous enemy is destroyed by the help of angels.”

_Tapestry No. 5._ “Jealousy never attains the peace of virtue;
nevertheless the latter shall be oppressed till the end of the world.
Certain hope and the faith of the strong never fail, though the ungodly
mock those who live in the fear of God.”

_Tapestry No. 6._ “Anger shall be turned against the reproved, and the
anger of God shall oppress sinners. Those who repent not shall suffer
death and eternal fire as a punishment for their wickedness.”

_Tapestry No. 7._ “The day of Antichrist shall come and shall provoke
the last war against faith. Babylon shall be conquered and destroyed,
and her lost sons shall suffer eternal punishment with her.”

_Tapestry No. 8._ “On the day of the Last Judgment, the devil shall be
shut up in the abyss, and the choir of saints shall sing praises unto
God. The victorious Church shall receive her just reward, and filled
with gladness shall enjoy for ever the Kingdom of Heaven.”


GROUP 17. _The Seven Deadly Sins_ (2 Series)

This favourite mediæval subject is depicted in two series of tapestries
in the possession of Philip II of Spain. Both series are woven in silk
and wool, picked out with gold and silver threads. Neither, however,
remains complete. The name of the designer of the cartoons is not known.
It may probably have been Bernard van Orley. The general design is
markedly Flemish, but the Renaissance influence is evident in the
treatment of some of the figures, and more particularly in the borders.
These show delicate imagination, exquisite workmanship, and exuberance
of detail, and are adorned with a wealth of flowers and fruits, and tiny
elves.


_1st Series_ (6 Tapestries)

This series was probably made either for Margaret of Austria or Mary of
Hungary. It was used to decorate the monastery of Guadelupe, at the
interview in 1575 between Philip II and Sebastian of Portugal. Each
tapestry is explained by a Latin text on the upper border. The sins
represented are Avarice, Luxury, Anger, Greed, Envy, and Laziness.


_2nd Series_ (4 Tapestries)

These tapestries are attributed to Pannemaker. Pinchart states that they
were taken from the Count of Egmont’s collection and sent to the Spanish
Court by the Duke of Alba, when the first-mentioned nobleman was
sentenced to death as a rebel in 1567.

The pieces now remaining represent Pride, Luxury, Greed, and Laziness.
The other three tapestries were still in existence in 1660 and were used
at the marriage of the Infanta Maria-Theresa and Louis XIV.




CHAPTER V

RENAISSANCE TAPESTRIES


The date of the beginning of the Renaissance tapestries is well defined.
In 1515 came the order to Brussels to execute tapestries of _The Acts of
the Apostles_ from the cartoons of Raphael. The Pope required them for
the Sistine Chapel. This was the beginning of the decline of the art of
Flemish tapestry weaving.

Raphael was not accustomed to designing cartoons for tapestry. His
methods were unsuitable for translation into fabric. He set the
_tapissiere_ problems to solve in paint. Only the wonderful skill of the
Flemish workmen enabled them to produce tapestries that astonished
Europe. But a new method had to be adopted. Raphael had planned out both
his cartoons and his borders in every detail. Nothing was left to the
_tapissier_ but to copy with the minutest care every line, every shade
of colour expressed by the painter. The artist _tapissier_ became under
this new fashion only a master craftsman. The most pleasing feature of
the Gothic tapestries disappear--the riot of _millefleurs_, and the
spasmodic intrusion of fascinating little dogs and wild animals.

But if there were losses there were compensating gains. The whole art of
the Italian cartoonist was freer, more vital and less stilted than that
of his northern neighbour. The crowded figures disappeared and their
place was taken by one group accompanied only by a few subordinate
figures, but the central figures were perfect in their form. The Gothic
buildings of the background gave way to a rich Renaissance architecture.
The old woodland flowers were replaced by the luxuriant and exotic
verdure of the south. That the methods introduced by Raphael should
degenerate in the hands of artists of less genius was inevitable, and in
course of time the _tapissier_ was no longer capable of improving the
original design.


GROUP 18. _The Acts of the Apostles_ (10 Tapestries)

These tapestries are not the original ones woven for Pope Leo X, but are
reproductions which (from the absence of any tapestry mark) must have
been woven from the original cartoons within a very short space of time.
These cartoons, as has been said, were the work of Raphael Santi
assisted by his pupils. The original tapestries were executed by Pierre
van Aelst in gold, silk, and wool, under the supervision of Bernard van
Orley, who had been the pupil of the great Italian painter. They were
painted in 1519. Pierre van Aelst had been tapestry maker to Philip le
Bel and Charles V., and was probably the foremost weaver of his time in
Brussels. More than one reproduction was made, and it is probable that
one fell into the hands of the Emperor Charles. They are not mentioned,
however, before the inventories made by Philip II. The tenth piece in
the original series is not found in this collection on account of its
size, and may not have been included in the reproduction. A similar
series was in the possession of Henry VIII. of England and was bought at
the sale of Charles I.’s effects by Marquis del Carpio. It was inherited
by the house of Alba in 1662, and sold in 1823 to the English Consul in
Catalonia. George IV. refused to purchase it and it finally reached the
Berlin Museum.

For a time the cartoons of Raphael were lost. Seven of them, however,
were purchased by Charles I. on the advice of Rubens and ordered to be
reproduced at Mortlake. The cartoons are now in the South Kensington
Museum.

The tapestries represent the following subjects:

_Tapestry No. 1._ The miraculous draught of fishes.

_Tapestry No. 2._ St. Peter chosen by Christ as the head of the Church.

_Tapestry No. 3._ The miracle of the paralytic.

_Tapestry No. 4._ The death of Ananias.

_Tapestry No. 5._ The death of St. Stephen.

_Tapestry No. 6._ The conversion of St. Paul.

_Tapestry No. 7._ The blindness of Elymas.

_Tapestry No. 8._ St. Paul and St. Barnabas at Lystra.

_Tapestry No. 9._ St. Paul preaches at the Areopagus in Athens.


GROUP 19. _Vertumnus and Pomona_ (6 Tapestries)

Despite an occasional lapse in drawing, this series of tapestries is one
of the finest examples of pure Renaissance workmanship to be found in
the Spanish royal collection. The story, of course, is taken from Ovid,
and was a favourite one with the Flemish weavers. The tapestries show
the true Renaissance love of the open country and lovely gardens with a
wealth of flowers and foliage. They are purely decorative in intention,
and the figures are merely accessory.

No less than four copies of this series are in the Madrid collection.
The series reproduced in this volume was woven at Brussels and purchased
by the Emperor Charles V. at Anvers in 1546. It is in silk and wool,
heavily enriched with gold, and was the original from which the others
were copied.

Two other copies, also woven in gold, were made by Pannemaker at the
command of Philip II. These are hung in the State dining-hall of the
palace. The fourth copy, in silk and wool only, was made for John of
Austria, and by him bequeathed to Philip II.


_The Story of Scipio Africanus_ (6 Tapestries)

This fine series of tapestries offers an interesting contrast with the
other historical series already described, _The Conquest of Tunis_. The
story of Scipio is in pure Renaissance style, and though the designer of
the cartoons is unknown, they show very strongly the influence of Giulio
Romano, and may even have proceeded from his pencil. Only one piece of
the tapestry bears a weaver’s mark, which has not been deciphered. They
were inherited by Charles V. from his sister, Mary of Hungary, on her
death in 1558.

The tapestries represent incidents in the life of Publius Cornelius
Scipio, the elder, surnamed Africanus from his triumphs against the
Carthaginians. Scipio was one of Rome’s greatest generals, and also a
man of very considerable culture, who wrote his own memoirs in Greek. He
was also an accomplished orator and was popularly supposed to hold
direct communication with the gods.

The tapestries deal mostly with Scipio’s campaigns in Spain and Africa.
The year after his father’s death he had offered himself for the command
in Spain. In spite of his youth he was unanimously elected. He had
previously fought at the disastrous battles of Ticinus, the Trebia, and
Cannæ.

All Spain south of the Ebro was in the hands of the Carthaginians, but
the three great Punic generals were preoccupied with revolts in Africa
and were in disagreement amongst themselves. Taking advantage of this,
Scipio unexpectedly attacked and captured New Carthage, a large supply
of war materials falling into his hands. This victory he followed up in
209 B.C. by driving Hasdrubal from Barcelona and the upper Guadalquivir.

After further victories in Spain Scipio returned to Rome and was elected
Consul for Sicily. In 204 B.C. he again sailed for Africa and landed
near Utica. He destroyed two combined armies of the Carthaginians and
the Numidians, and after peace negotiations were finally broken off
gained a crushing victory over Hannibal near Zama. This gained him the
surname of Africanus.

Some years later Scipio was charged together with his brother with
peculation. On the day of his trial, however, by reminding the people
that this was the anniversary of Zama he was acquitted amid great
acclamations. He then retired into private life.

The tapestries represent:

_Tapestry No. 1._ Siege and assault of Carthage by Scipio Africanus.

_Tapestry No. 2._ Scipio gives up his betrothed.

_Tapestry No. 3._ The Romans penetrate into the camp of Hasdrubal.

_Tapestry No. 4._ Battle of Zama and defeat of Hannibal.

_Tapestry No. 5._ The triumph of Scipio.

_Tapestry No. 6._ The banquet.


_Monkeys or Grotesque Figures_ (10 Tapestries)

These fine Flemish tapestries were added to the royal collection at
Madrid by Philip II. They are of exquisite workmanship and are heavily
enriched with threads of gold. There are ten pieces in the series, four
of which being hung on the walls of the palace cannot be here
reproduced.

These grotesque figures form an ideal tapestry design. “In the centre of
each tapestry,” says the Count Valencia de Don Juan, “there is a light
and elegant bower of trellis-work, formed by arches, scrolls, and
caryatids; the ribbon surrounding it is formed of flowers, fruit, and
animals, amongst which frolic monkeys and dogs.” The borders are
enriched with mythological figures.

The tapestries were woven by Hector Vuyens, who made his own designs.


GROUP 20. _The Story of Cyrus the Great_ (8 Tapestries)

These tapestries, especially remarkable for their beautiful borders,
were woven probably by Nicolas Leiniers, a well-known _tapissier_ of the
sixteenth century. They bear the Brussels mark, but the designer of the
cartoons is unknown. They are carried out in silk and wool, enriched
with gold and silver thread. The tapestries passed into the possession
of Philip II., and are known to have been used in the funeral ceremonies
of Francis II. of France. There is in existence the account which was
rendered by Philip’s tapestry maker to his master for the transportation
of the tapestries from Madrid to Toledo, where the funeral took place.

The tapestries represent episodes in the life of the great Persian
conqueror, and certain of the legends that were current about his
parentage. The designer of the cartoons seems to have followed the
Thucedidean account of the delivering of the boy Cyrus to a shepherd,
and his subsequent recognition by Astyages. Cyrus’s wars against the
people of Lydia and his capture of Crœsus are, of course, historic.
There is a legend related by some of the early historians that Cyrus
desired to put Crœsus to death at the stake, a proceeding which would
have been directly contrary to the principles of the Zoroastrian
religion. The designer of the tapestries appears to have got hold of a
distorted form of this story in the fifth panel of this series.

The ghastly end imagined by the cartoonist for the conqueror is wholly
fictitious. It is probable that Cyrus was killed actually on the field
of battle.


GROUP 21. _The Story of Diana or Artemis_ (7 Tapestries)

It is under this name that this series of tapestries is classed in the
inventories. On the plates of the pieces themselves, however, only the
name, Diana, is employed. The series is the only one of French origin in
the Spanish royal collection. It is from the Gobelins looms, which were
established in 1603 by Van der Planken and Mare de Comano by contract
with Henry IV. on the settlement of the Civil Wars.

The life of Diana was a favourite subject of the French tapestry weavers
from this time onward, and the pieces were eagerly purchased by the
ladies who enjoyed the favour of the Navarrois king. Guiffrey gives a
detailed account of all these series in his large _Histoire de la
Tapisserie en France_.

The designer of the series in the royal collection is unknown. It is a
fine example of the florid art of the Renaissance. The borders are
especially fine, containing medallions supported by nymphs and satyrs
garlanded with fruit and flowers. In the orders of two of the plates
are monograms of silk and gold similar to that in _Les Noces de
l’Empereur Otton_ in the National Museum at Munich. Coats-of-arms are
seen on the scrolls that surmount the panels. In the centre are the arms
of Colonna with a ducal crown; to the right a chequered shield with
argent and purple squares; to the left an escutcheon carrying two
wolves.

The subjects of the different tapestries are as follow:

(1) Latona changing the labourers into frogs.

(2) Diana surrounded by dogs.

(3) Diana with nymphs resting in a wood.

(4) Diana begs from Jupiter eternal maidenhood.

(5) Niobe dissuades the people from sacrificing to Latona.

(6) Diana and Apollo slay the children of Niobe.

(7) Diana approves Meleager’s design of offering a boar’s head to
Alithea.

There is another plate referring to the same subject which represents
the birth of Diana.


GROUP 22. _Tapestries of the Chamber of Charles III._ (2 Tapestries)

On the completion of the new palace of Madrid in 1764, Charles III.
ordered his bedroom to be decorated with tapestries to the number of
seventy-seven pieces. These, of which the two plates reproduced here are
a fair example, were specially woven at the royal factory at Madrid.
They are all of rich materials and fine workmanship, and were used, as
well for hangings as for the covering of chairs and couches. The
tapestries were designed by Antoine Anglois. The two here reproduced are
woven in silk and gold. They were used as a curtain to the balcony of
the King’s bedroom and as a counterpane and bolster-cover for the royal
bed.

It was owing to the interest taken by this monarch in the art of
tapestry weaving that the factory at Madrid was placed under the
supervision of that fine artist, Raphael Menos.


GROUP 23. _The Spheres_

This boldly planned and finely executed series is composed of three
tapestries. The name of the designer of the cartoons is unknown, but he
was evidently inspired by the Italian Renaissance. The figures are
anatomically correct, and many of them were copied from well-known
pictures.

No. 1 shows Hercules upholding the world, and bears the inscription,
_Magna Virtus sed Alienæ obnoxia_.

No. 2 represents Atlas bearing the Universe on his shoulders.

No. 3 represents Ferdinand and Isabella enthroned as monarchs of the
whole world.

[Illustration: STORY OF THE HOLY VIRGIN. BY VAN EYCK

PLATE 1.

1. JESUS WITH HIS MOTHER]

[Illustration: STORY OF THE HOLY VIRGIN. BY VAN EYCK

PLATE 2

2. THE VIRGIN PRAYING]

[Illustration: STORY OF THE HOLY VIRGIN. BY VAN EYCK

PLATE 3

3. THE ADORATION OF THE MAGI]

[Illustration: STORY OF THE HOLY VIRGIN. BY VAN EYCK

PLATE 4

4. THE PRESENTATION OF JESUS IN THE TEMPLE]

[Illustration: THE STORY OF DAVID AND BATHSHEBA

PLATE 5

1. DAVID SEES BATHSHEBA]

[Illustration: THE STORY OF DAVID AND BATHSHEBA

PLATE 6

2. BATHSHEBA CONSENTS TO THE LOVE OF DAVID]

[Illustration: THE STORY OF DAVID AND BATHSHEBA

PLATE 7

3. NATHAN REPROACHES DAVID WITH HIS SIN]

[Illustration: STORY OF JOHN THE BAPTIST. BY VAN EYCK

PLATE 8

1. ZACHARIUS RECOVERING HIS SPEECH]

[Illustration: STORY OF JOHN THE BAPTIST. BY VAN EYCK

PLATE 9

2. THE CHILD JOHN ASKS PERMISSION TO DEVOTE HIMSELF TO GOD]

[Illustration: STORY OF JOHN THE BAPTIST. BY VAN EYCK

PLATE 10

3. ST. JOHN PREACHING IN THE WILDERNESS]

[Illustration: STORY OF JOHN THE BAPTIST. BY VAN EYCK

PLATE 11

4. THE BAPTISM OF OUR LORD]

[Illustration: PLATE 12

THE PASSION OF OUR LORD

IN THE GARDEN OF OLIVES]

[Illustration: PLATE 13

THE PASSION OF OUR LORD. BY VAN DER WEYDEN

THE CRUCIFIXION]

[Illustration: PLATE 14

THE PASSION OF OUR LORD

THE DESCENT FROM THE CROSS]

[Illustration: VICES AND VIRTUES

PLATE 15

1. GOD REWARDS WORSHIP]

[Illustration: VICES AND VIRTUES

PLATE 16

2. VIRTUE PUNISHES VICE]

[Illustration: VICES AND VIRTUES

PLATE 17

3. FORTUNE DISTRIBUTES ROSES]

[Illustration: VICES AND VIRTUES

PLATE 18

4. GOD REWARDS THE DEVOUT]

[Illustration: VICES AND VIRTUES

PLATE 19

5. VIRTUE REWARDS HER VOTARIES]

[Illustration: VICES AND VIRTUES

PLATE 20

6. GOD DISTRIBUTES HONOURS]

[Illustration: VICES AND VIRTUES

PLATE 21

7. PRUDENCE IS COMMENDED]

[Illustration: VICES AND VIRTUES

PLATE 22

8. THE FAITHFUL GAIN RENOWN]

[Illustration: VICES AND VIRTUES

PLATE 23

9. INFAMY IS PUNISHED]

[Illustration: PLATE 24

VICES AND VIRTUES

10. THE LAWGIVER DELIVERS JUDGMENT]

[Illustration: PLATE 25

THE FOUNDATION OF ROME

1. ROMULUS AND REMUS ARE FOUND]

[Illustration: THE FOUNDATION OF ROME

PLATE 26

2. REMUS TAKEN CAPTIVE]

[Illustration: THE FOUNDATION OF ROME

PLATE 27

3. ROMULUS BECOMES KING]

[Illustration: THE FOUNDATION OF ROME

PLATE 28

4. ROMULUS DICTATING THE LAWS]

[Illustration: THE FOUNDATION OF ROME

PLATE 29

5. ROMULUS INSTITUTES THE FEAST OF NEPTUNE]

[Illustration: THE FOUNDATION OF ROME

PLATE 30

6. ROMULUS GIVES THE LAWS TO THE PEOPLE]

[Illustration: THE FOUNDATION OF ROME

PLATE 31

7. AFTER THE CAPTURE OF THE SABINES, HERSILIA IS PRESENTED TO ROMULUS]

[Illustration: CONQUEST OF TUNIS BY CHARLES V

PLATE 32

PLAN OF THE CAMPAIGN]

[Illustration: PLATE 33

CONQUEST OF TUNIS BY CHARLES V. BY J. VERMEYEN

REVIEW OF THE ARMY]

[Illustration: CONQUEST OF TUNIS BY CHARLES V

PLATE 34

REVIEW OF THE ARMY (PART OF)]

[Illustration: THE CONQUEST OF TUNIS BY CHARLES V

PLATE 35

DISEMBARKING AT GOLETTA]

[Illustration: CONQUEST OF TUNIS BY CHARLES V

PLATE 36

ATTACK ON GOLETTA]

[Illustration: CONQUEST OF TUNIS BY CHARLES V

PLATE 37

FIGHT UNDER GOLETTA]

[Illustration: THE CONQUEST OF TUNIS BY CHARLES V

PLATE 38

SORTIE OF THE ENEMY FROM GOLETTA]

[Illustration: THE CONQUEST OF TUNIS BY CHARLES V

PLATE 39

THE CAPTURE OF GOLETTA]

[Illustration: CONQUEST OF TUNIS BY CHARLES V

PLATE 40

THE CAPTURE OF TUNIS]

[Illustration: PLATE 41

THE CONQUEST OF TUNIS BY CHARLES V

THE SACKING OF TUNIS]

[Illustration: PLATE 42

CONQUEST OF TUNIS BY CHARLES V

THE ARMY RE-EMBARKS AFTER RETURNING FROM GOLETTA]

[Illustration: PLATE 43

CONQUEST OF TUNIS BY CHARLES V. BY J. VERMEYEN

THE ARMY CAMPING AT PADA]

[Illustration: PLATE 44

STORY OF ABRAHAM

1. THREE ANGELS ANNOUNCE TO ABRAHAM THAT SARAH WILL HAVE A SON]

[Illustration: PLATE 45

THE STORY OF ABRAHAM

2. ABRAHAM OFFERING SACRIFICE]

[Illustration: PLATE 46

SCENES FROM REVELATIONS

1. THE ANGEL THROWS THE BEAST INTO THE ABYSS]

[Illustration: PLATE 47

SCENES FROM REVELATIONS

2. THE THREE HORSEMEN]

[Illustration: PLATE 48

SCENES FROM REVELATIONS

3. ST. JOHN AND THE SEVEN CHURCHES OF ASIA]

[Illustration: PLATE 49

SCENES FROM REVELATIONS

4. ST. JOHN RECEIVES THE ORDER TO MEASURE THE TEMPLE OF GOD]

[Illustration: PLATE 50

SCENES FROM REVELATIONS

5. CONDEMNATION OF THE PROSTITUTE]

[Illustration: PLATE 51

SCENES FROM REVELATIONS

6. THE ANGEL CARRYING THE GOSPEL]

[Illustration: PLATE 52

SCENES FROM REVELATIONS

7. THE CROWD ADORE THE LAMB]

[Illustration: PLATE 53

SCENES FROM REVELATIONS

8. THE FOUR ANGELS OF EUPHRATES]

[Illustration: PLATE 54

SCENES FROM REVELATIONS

9. COMBAT BETWEEN GOOD AND EVIL SPIRITS]

[Illustration: PLATE 55

THE SEVEN DEADLY SINS

1. LUXURY]

[Illustration: THE SEVEN DEADLY SINS

PLATE 56

2. GREEDINESS]

[Illustration: PLATE 57

THE SEVEN DEADLY SINS

3. ENVY]

[Illustration: PLATE 58

THE SEVEN DEADLY SINS

4. ANGER]

[Illustration: PLATE 59

ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. BY RAPHAEL

1. THE MIRACULOUS DRAUGHT OF FISHES]

[Illustration: PLATE 60

ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. BY RAPHAEL

2. THE MIRACULOUS DRAUGHT OF FISHES]

[Illustration: PLATE 61

ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. BY RAPHAEL

3. THE MIRACLE OF THE PARALYTIC]

[Illustration: PLATE 62

THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. BY RAPHAEL

4. THE DEATH OF ANANIAS]

[Illustration: PLATE 63

THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. BY RAPHAEL

5. THE MARTYRDOM OF ST. STEPHEN]

[Illustration: PLATE 64

ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. BY RAPHAEL

6. MARTYRDOM OF ST. STEPHEN]

[Illustration: PLATE 65

THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. BY RAPHAEL

7. THE CONVERSION OF ST. PAUL]

[Illustration: PLATE 66

THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. BY RAPHAEL

8. THE BLINDNESS OF ELYMAS]

[Illustration: PLATE 67

ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. BY RAPHAEL

9. ST. PAUL AT LYSTRA]

[Illustration: PLATE 68

THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. BY RAPHAEL

10. ST. PAUL IN THE TEMPLE]

[Illustration: PLATE 69

THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. BY RAPHAEL

11. ST. PAUL AT EPHESUS]

[Illustration: PLATE 70

ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. BY RAPHAEL

12. ST. PAUL AT EPHESUS]

[Illustration: PLATE 71

ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. BY RAPHAEL

13. ST. PAUL PREACHING IN ATHENS]

[Illustration: PLATE 72

ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. BY RAPHAEL

14. CHRIST APPEARS TO HIS DISCIPLES]

[Illustration: PLATE 73

ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. BY RAPHAEL

15. CHRIST CHOOSING ST. PETER]

[Illustration: PLATE 74

ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. BY RAPHAEL

16. THE PARALYTIC]

[Illustration: PLATE 75

ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. BY RAPHAEL

17. DEATH OF ANANIAS]

[Illustration: PLATE 76

ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. BY RAPHAEL

18. CONVERSION OF ST. PAUL]

[Illustration: PLATE 77

ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. BY RAPHAEL

19. THE BLIND MAN ELYMAS]

[Illustration: PLATE 78

ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. BY RAPHAEL

20. ST. PAUL AND ST. BARNABAS AT LYSTRA]

[Illustration: PLATE 70

VERTUMNUS AND POMONA

1. VERTUMNUS TRANSFORMED INTO A HUSBANDMAN]

[Illustration: PLATE 80

VERTUMNUS AND POMONA

2. VERTUMNUS TAKES A FISHING ROD]

[Illustration: PLATE 81

VERTUMNUS AND POMONA

3. VERTUMNUS TRANSFORMED INTO AN AGRICULTURIST]

[Illustration: PLATE 82

VERTUMNUS AND POMONA

4. VERTUMNUS TRANSFORMED INTO A GARDENER]

[Illustration: PLATE 83

VERTUMNUS AND POMONA

5. VERTUMNUS TRANSFORMED INTO A REAPER]

[Illustration: PLATE 84

VERTUMNUS AND POMONA

6. VERTUMNUS AT THE HARVEST]

[Illustration: PLATE 85

VERTUMNUS AND POMONA

7. POMONA UPBRAIDS VERTUMNUS]

[Illustration: PLATE 86

VERTUMNUS AND POMONA

8. VERTUMNUS, DISGUISED, KISSES POMONA]

[Illustration: PLATE 87

VERTUMNUS AND POMONA

9. VERTUMNUS REGAINS HIS NATURAL FORM]

[Illustration: PLATE 88

THE STORY OF SCIPIO AFRICANUS

1. THE CAPTURE OF CARTHAGE]

[Illustration: PLATE 89

THE STORY OF SCIPIO AFRICANUS

2. SCIPIO SAVES HIS FATHER AT THE BATTLE OF TESIN]

[Illustration: PLATE 90

THE STORY OF SCIPIO AFRICANUS

3. CARTHAGE SENDS AMBASSADORS TO SCIPIO AFTER THE BATTLE OF ZAMA]

[Illustration: PLATE 91

THE STORY OF SCIPIO AFRICANUS

4. THE TRIUMPH OF SCIPIO]

[Illustration: PLATE 92

THE STORY OF SCIPIO AFRICANUS

5. THE BANQUET]

[Illustration: PLATE 93

THE STORY OF SCIPIO AFRICANUS

6. SCIPIO GIVES UP HIS BETROTHED]

[Illustration: PLATE 94

THE STORY OF SCIPIO AFRICANUS

7. SCIPIO GIVES UP HIS BETROTHED (SECTION OF TAPESTRY)]

[Illustration: PLATE 95

THE STORY OF SCIPIO AFRICANUS

8. SCIPIO DELIVERS JUDGMENT]

[Illustration: PLATE 96

THE STORY OF SCIPIO AFRICANUS

9. THE TRIUMPH OF SCIPIO]

[Illustration: PLATE 97

THE STORY OF SCIPIO AFRICANUS

10. INTERVIEW BETWEEN SCIPIO AND HANNIBAL]

[Illustration: PLATE 98

THE STORY OF SCIPIO AFRICANUS

10. THE TRIUMPH OF SCIPIO]

[Illustration: PLATE 99

THE STORY OF CYRUS

1. CYRUS TAKES ASTYAGE PRISONER]

[Illustration: PLATE 100

THE STORY OF CYRUS

2. CYRUS IS RECOGNIZED BY ASTYAGE]

[Illustration: PLATE 101

THE STORY OF CYRUS

3. MEETING OF CYRUS AND THE QUEEN]

[Illustration: PLATE 102

THE STORY OF CYRUS

4. CYRUS SENDS A MESSENGER]

[Illustration: PLATE 108

THE STORY OF CYRUS

5. CYRUS UNITES THE MEDES AND PERSIANS]

[Illustration: PLATE 104

THE STORY OF CYRUS

6. CYRUS SAVES CRŒSUS FROM THE STAKE]

[Illustration: PLATE 105

THE STORY OF CYRUS

7. THE QUEEN AND CYRUS]

[Illustration: PLATE 106

THE STORY OF CYRUS

8. CYRUS TAKES CRŒSUS PRISONER]

[Illustration: THE STORY OF CYRUS

PLATE 107

9. CYRUS AND THE LYDIANS]

[Illustration: THE STORY OF CYRUS

PLATE 108

10. CYRUS RELEASES THE HEBREWS]

[Illustration: STORY OF CYRUS

PLATE 109

11. CYRUS IS ENTRUSTED TO A SHEPHERD]

[Illustration: STORY OF CYRUS

PLATE 110

12. HYSTASPE AND AMENOPHIS]

[Illustration: STORY OF DIANA

PLATE 111

1. THE BIRTH OF DIANA]

[Illustration: STORY OF DIANA

PLATE 112

2. DIANA RESTING]

[Illustration: STORY OF DIANA

PLATE 113

3. DIANA AND JUPITER]

[Illustration: PLATE 114

THE SPHERES

1. HERCULES SUPPORTS THE SKY]

[Illustration: THE SPHERES

PLATE 115

2. ATLAS SUPPORTS THE WORLD]

[Illustration: STORY OF DECIUS

PLATE 116

1. DECIUS RAISES HIS COUNTRY]

[Illustration: STORY OF DECIUS

PLATE 117

2. DECIUS SENDS THE LICTORS TO MANLIUS]

[Illustration: STORY OF DECIUS

PLATE 118

3. DECIUS BIDS FAREWELL TO THE LICTORS]

[Illustration: STORY OF DECIUS

PLATE 119

4. DECIUS DEPARTS TO FIGHT THE LATINS]

[Illustration: STORY OF DECIUS

PLATE 120

5. DECIUS DEDICATES HIMSELF TO THE LEGIONS]

[Illustration: STORY OF DECIUS

PLATE 121

6. VALERIUS AND DECIUS]

[Illustration: STORY OF DECIUS

PLATE 122

7. THE VISION OF DECIUS]

[Illustration: STORY OF DECIUS

PLATE 123

8. DEATH OF DECIUS]

[Illustration: STORY OF DECIUS

PLATE 124

9. FUNERAL OF DECIUS]

[Illustration: STORY OF VENUS

PLATE 125

1. OFFERINGS TO VENUS]

[Illustration: STORY OF VENUS

PLATE 126

2. THE CHALLENGE OF CUPID AND VENUS]

[Illustration: STORY OF THE CREATION OF MAN

PLATE 127

1. GOD CREATES MAN]

[Illustration: STORY OF THE CREATION OF MAN

PLATE 128

2. CAIN KILLS HIS BROTHER ABEL]

[Illustration: STORY OF THE CREATION OF MAN

PLATE 129

3. GOD CURSES CAIN]

[Illustration: STORY OF THE CREATION OF MAN

PLATE 130

THE TREE OF GOOD AND EVIL]

[Illustration: THE STORY OF TOBIAS

PLATE 131

1. SARAH MARRIES TOBIAS]

[Illustration: THE STORY OF TOBIAS

PLATE 132

2. RETURN OF TOBIAS AND SARAH]

[Illustration: PLATE 133

THE SEASONS

1. SUMMER]

[Illustration: PLATE 134

THE SEASONS

2. WINTER]

[Illustration: STORY OF SOLOMON

PLATE 135

1. SOLOMON IS ANOINTED KING]

[Illustration: PLATE 136

STORY OF SOLOMON

2. SOLOMON MARRIES AN EGYPTIAN PRINCESS]

[Illustration: PLATE 137

STORY OF SOLOMON

3. SOLOMON AND THE QUEEN OF SHEBA]

[Illustration: PLATE 138

HISTORY OF MAN’S LIFE

1. DIVINITY ADVOCATES TEMPERANCE TO MAN]

[Illustration: HISTORY OF MAN’S LIFE

PLATE 139

2. THE VICES REPULSE TEMPERANCE]

[Illustration: HISTORY OF MAN’S LIFE

PLATE 140

3. TIME SURROUNDS HIM WITH PRUDENCE]

[Illustration: HISTORY OF MAN’S LIFE

PLATE 141

4. VIRTUE TRIUMPHANT]

[Illustration: PLATE 142

HISTORY OF MAN’S LIFE

5. PATIENCE HUMILIATES FORTUNE]

[Illustration: HISTORY OF MAN’S LIFE

PLATE 143

6. FORTUNE FIGHTS AVARICE]

[Illustration: HISTORY OF MAN’S LIFE

PLATE 144

7. BLIND FORTUNE BESTOWS GOOD AND EVIL]

[Illustration: HISTORY OF MAN’S LIFE

PLATE 145

8. TWO ANCIENT PHILOSOPHERS]

[Illustration: HISTORY OF MAN’S LIFE

PLATE 146

9. DIVINITY REVEALS TEMPERANCE]

[Illustration: PLATE 147

HISTORY OF MAN’S LIFE

10. VICE REPULSES TEMPERANCE]

[Illustration: STORY OF ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA

PLATE 148

1. ANTHONY LEAVES ROME]

[Illustration: PLATE 149

STORY OF ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA

2. ANTHONY RECEIVES HOMAGE]

[Illustration: PLATE 150

STORY OF ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA

3. ANTHONY DISPOSES OF THE TREASURES OF EGYPT]

[Illustration: STORY OF ANTHONY AND CLEOPATRA

PLATE 151

CLEOPATRA MOCKS ANTHONY’S WEAKNESS]

[Illustration: PLATE 152

STORY OF ALEXANDER THE GREAT

1. ALEXANDER AND HIS DOCTOR PHILIP]

[Illustration: STORY OF ALEXANDER THE GREAT

PLATE 153

2. BATTLE OF ISSUS]

[Illustration: PLATE 154

STORY OF ALEXANDER THE GREAT

3. THE SIEGE OF TYRE]

[Illustration: STORY OF ALEXANDER THE GREAT

PLATE 155

4. ALEXANDER IN CARMONIA]

[Illustration: STORY OF ALEXANDER THE GREAT

PLATE 156

5. SURRENDER OF THE KING OF CYPRUS AND PHŒNICIA]

[Illustration: STORY OF ALEXANDER THE GREAT

PLATE 157

6. ALEXANDER IN ASIA MINOR]

[Illustration: PLATE 158

THE TRIUMPH OF LOVE]

[Illustration: PLATE 159

THE TRIUMPH OF DEATH]

[Illustration: PLATE 160

THE TRIUMPH OF CHASTITY]

[Illustration: PLATE 161

STORY OF TELEMACHUS

1. YOUNG TELEMACHUS]

[Illustration: STORY OF TELEMACHUS

PLATE 162

2. NEPTUNE WRECKING ULYSSES’ SHIP]

[Illustration: STORY OF ST. PAUL

PLATE 163

1. ST. PAUL IN THE TEMPLE]

[Illustration: STORY OF ST. PAUL

PLATE 164

2. ST. PAUL BEFORE AGRIPPA]

[Illustration: STORY OF ST. PAUL

PLATE 165

ST. PAUL EXECUTED AT ROME]

[Illustration: TEMPTATIONS OF ST. ANTHONY

PLATE 166

1. DEPARTURE OF ST. ANTHONY FOR THE RETREAT]

[Illustration: TEMPTATIONS OF ST. ANTHONY

PLATE 167

2. ST. ANTHONY TEMPTED BY THE DEVIL]

[Illustration: TEMPTATIONS OF ST. ANTHONY

PLATE 168

PARADISE, PURGATORY AND HELL]

[Illustration: STORY OF THE EMPEROR OCTAVIUS

PLATE 169

1. JULIUS CÆSAR ADOPTS OCTAVIUS]

[Illustration: STORY OF THE EMPEROR OCTAVIUS

PLATE 170

2. BATTLE OF PHILIPPI]

[Illustration: PLATE 171

STORY OF THE EMPEROR OCTAVIUS

3. OCTAVIUS CLOSES THE TEMPLE OF WAR]

[Illustration: STORY OF OCTAVIUS

PLATE 172

4. DEATH OF CLEOPATRA]

[Illustration: STORY OF MOSES

PLATE 173

1. MOSES AND AARON BEFORE PHAROAH]

[Illustration: STORY OF MOSES

PLATE 174

2. GOD CHOOSES MOSES TO DELIVER ISRAEL]

[Illustration: STORY OF MOSES

PLATE 175

2. MOSES COMES FROM MOUNT SINAI]

[Illustration: BATTLES OF THE ARCHDUKE ALBERT

PLATE 176

SURRENDER OF HULST]

[Illustration: BATTLES OF THE ARCHDUKE ALBERT

PLATE 177

2. ARDRES IS SURPRISED BY A NIGHT ATTACK]

[Illustration: BATTLES OF THE ARCHDUKE ALBERT

PLATE 178

3. HULST BESIEGED]

[Illustration: BATTLES OF THE ARCHDUKE ALBERT

PLATE 179

4. TAKING OF CALAIS]

[Illustration: PLATE 180

BATTLES OF THE ARCHDUKE ALBERT

5. THE RETURN OF THE GARRISON]

[Illustration: STORY OF THESEUS

PLATE 181

1. THESEUS LEAVES FOR CRETE]

[Illustration: STORY OF THESEUS

PLATE 182

2. THESEUS RECEIVES THE SWORD OF ÆGEUS]

[Illustration: STORY OF THESEUS

PLATE 183

3. ÆGEUS RECOGNISES HIS SON]

[Illustration: STORY OF THESEUS

PLATE 184

4. THESEUS ARMED WITH THE MACE]

[Illustration: PLATE 185

5. BACCHUS MARRIES ARIADNE]

[Illustration: STORY OF THESEUS

PLATE 186

6. THESEUS RECEIVES THE RING OF MINOS]

[Illustration: STORY OF THESEUS

PLATE 187

7. THESEUS LEADS THE BULL OF MARATHON]

[Illustration: STORY OF THESEUS

PLATE 188

8. THESEUS AND THE HEAD OF MINOTAURUS]

[Illustration: PLATE 189

THE FUNERAL OF KING TURNUS]

[Illustration: PLATE 190

DIDO CONTEMPLATES ÆNEAS’ PORTRAIT]

[Illustration: STORY OF SAMSON

PLATE 191

1. SAMSON PROPOUNDS HIS RIDDLE]

[Illustration: STORY OF SAMSON

PLATE 192

2. SAMSON IS BETRAYED BY DELILAH]

[Illustration: STORY OF NOAH

PLATE 193

1. NOAH BUILDING THE ARK]

[Illustration: STORY OF NOAH

PLATE 194

2. NOAH LEAVING THE ARK]

[Illustration: THE WAY OF HONOUR

PLATE 195

1. GRACE ACCORDS IMMORTAL CROWNS]

[Illustration: THE WAY OF HONOUR

PLATE 196

2. VIRTUE ACCORDS HONOURS]

[Illustration: THE WAY OF HONOUR

PLATE 197

3. MERIT RECEIVES REWARDS]

[Illustration: STORY OF ZENOBIA

PLATE 198

1. NUPTIAL BANQUET OF ZENOBIA AND ODENAT]

[Illustration: STORY OF ZENOBIA

PLATE 199

2. ZENOBIA IS TAKEN PRISONER]

[Illustration: STORY OF ZENOBIA

PLATE 200

3. ZENOBIA LED CAPTIVE]

[Illustration: STORY OF DON QUIXOTE

PLATE 201

1. DEPARTURE OF DON QUIXOTE]

[Illustration: PLATE 202

STORY OF DON QUIXOTE

2. DON QUIXOTE AND THE THREE PEASANT WOMEN]

[Illustration: STORY OF DON QUIXOTE

PLATE 203

3. PRINCESS MICOMICONA]

[Illustration: PLATE 204

STORY OF DON QUIXOTE

4. DON QUIXOTE IS BEATEN BY THE MERCHANTS]

[Illustration: PLATE 205

STORY OF DON QUIXOTE

5. DON QUIXOTE IS ENCLOSED IN A CAGE]

[Illustration: PLATE 206

STORY OF DON QUIXOTE

6. THE MULETEER MEETS DON QUIXOTE]

[Illustration: PLATE 207

STORY OF DON QUIXOTE

7. SANCHO MARCHES TO TOBOSO]

[Illustration: PLATE 208

STORY OF DON QUIXOTE

8. REPETITIONS OF PRECEDING PICTURES]

[Illustration: PLATE 209

STORY OF PHAETON

1. PHŒBUS ALLOWS PHAETON TO DRIVE THE CHARIOT OF THE SUN]

[Illustration: PLATE 210

STORY OF PHAETON

2. PHAETON DRIVES THE CHARIOT OF THE SUN]

[Illustration: PLATE 211

STORY OF PHAETON

3. JUPITER CONFOUNDS PHAETON]

[Illustration: PLATE 212

STORY OF PHAETON

4. THE BODY OF PHAETON IS RECOVERED]

[Illustration: PLATE 213

CHASTITY PUTS CUPID TO FLIGHT]

[Illustration: PLATE 214

RUSTIC SCENES AFTER GOYA AND BAYEU]

[Illustration: PLATE 215

PANELS AFTER GOYA]

[Illustration: PLATE 216

QUARREL IN AN INN. AFTER GOYA]

[Illustration: PLATE 217

PANELS AFTER TENIERS]

[Illustration: PLATE 218

PANELS AFTER TENIERS]

[Illustration: PLATE 219

PANELS AFTER TENIERS]

[Illustration: PLATE 220

A VILLAGE DANCE AFTER TENIERS]

[Illustration: PLATE 221

PANELS AFTER TENIERS]

[Illustration: PLATE 222

DESCENT FROM THE CROSS]

[Illustration: PLATE 223

CHRIST ON THE CROSS]

[Illustration: PLATE 224

THE CRUCIFIXION. BY VAN DER WEYDEN]

[Illustration: PLATE 225

OUR LORD APPEARING TO THE HOLY WOMEN]

[Illustration: PLATE 226

ST. JEROME IN THE DESERT]

[Illustration: PLATE 227

THE ETERNAL FATHER]

[Illustration: PLATE 228

OUR LORD AND ST. VERONICA]

[Illustration: PLATE 229

MARY ANOINTING THE FEET OF THE SAVIOUR]

[Illustration: PLATE 230

THE CONFUSION OF TONGUES]

[Illustration: PLATE 231

THE LAST SUPPER]

[Illustration: PLATE 232

THE ADORATION OF THE MAGI]

[Illustration: PLATE 233

NEOPTOLEMY SACRIFICES POLYZENA]

[Illustration: PLATE 234

TIME AND TEMPERANCE RESTRAIN CUPID]

[Illustration: PLATE 235

ULYSSES ACCEPTS THE PRESENTS OF ALCINOUS]

[Illustration: PLATE 236

PENELOPE RECOGNISES ULYSSES]

[Illustration: PLATE 237

COURTIERS PRESENTING THEMSELVES BEFORE A KING]

[Illustration: PLATE 238

CHILDREN PLAYING. 16TH CENTURY]

[Illustration: PLATE 239

THE DEATH OF CLEOPATRA]

[Illustration: PLATE 240

PORTRAIT OF A WOMAN]

[Illustration: PLATE 241

CALCHAS AND AGAMEMNON]

[Illustration: PLATE 242

A GROVE]

[Illustration: PLATE 243

ON THE BANKS OF A RIVER]

[Illustration: PLATE 244

PRINCE BALTAZAR CARLOS]

[Illustration: PLATE 245

ALLEGORY OF THE TIBER AND ROME]

[Illustration: PLATE 246

IMPERIAL FUNERAL BED OF STATE]

[Illustration: PLATE 247

ROYAL ARMS OF PHILIP V]

[Illustration: PLATE 248

PANELS]

[Illustration: PLATE 249

A FRIEZE]

[Illustration: PLATE 250

BORDERS OF TAPESTRIES]

[Illustration: PLATE 251

THE PASSION OF OUR LORD]

[Illustration: PLATE 252

DEATH OF ABSALOM]

[Illustration: PLATE 253

THE BIRTH OF CHRIST]

[Illustration: PLATE 254

DESCENT FROM THE CROSS]

[Illustration: PLATE 255

ST. GREGORY’S MASS]

[Illustration: PLATE 256

TRIUMPH OF JOSEPH]

[Illustration: PLATE 257

KING CHARLES III]

[Illustration: PLATE 258

QUEEN AMELIA OF SAXONY]

[Illustration: PLATE 259

MYTHOLOGICAL SUBJECT]

[Illustration: PLATE 260

AFTER THE VICTORY]

[Illustration: PLATE 261

THE TEMPLE]

[Illustration: PLATE 262

THE COLONNADE]

[Illustration: PLATE 263

THE PALACE]

[Illustration: PLATE 264

FRAGMENTS]

[Illustration: PLATE 265

PANELS]

[Illustration: PLATE 266

PANELS AFTER ANDRES DE AGUIRRE]

[Illustration: PLATE 267

PANELS AFTER TENIERS]

[Illustration: PLATE 268

FRAGMENTS AFTER TENIERS]

[Illustration: PLATE 269

FRAGMENTS AFTER TENIERS]

[Illustration: PLATE 270

PANELS AFTER TENIERS]

[Illustration: PLATE 271

FRAGMENTS AFTER TENIERS]

[Illustration: PLATE 272

FRAGMENTS AFTER TENIERS]

[Illustration: PLATE 273

CHILDREN PLAYING. AFTER GOYA]

[Illustration: PLATE 274

PANELS AFTER GOYA]

[Illustration: PLATE 275

PANELS AFTER GOYA AND BAYEU]

[Illustration: PLATE 276

PANELS AFTER GOYA AND BAYEU]

[Illustration: PLATE 277

CORIOLANUS AND HIS MOTHER]

       *       *       *       *       *

HISTORIC PARIS

     By JETTA S. WOLFF, author of “The Story of the Paris Churches.”
     Illustrated. Crown 8vo. 10s. 6d. net.

In this most attractive volume we have the ideal guide-book, for,
besides fulfilling all the functions of a guide, Miss Wolff has a fine
literary style and considerable historical knowledge, as well as a very
intimate knowledge of all the historical sites and buildings of Paris.
Her interesting text is pleasantly aided by numerous drawings in line.


WHAT PICTURES TO SEE IN EUROPE

     By LORINDA M. BRYANT. With numerous Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 7s.
     6d. net.


WHAT SCULPTURE TO SEE IN EUROPE

     By LORINDA M. BRYANT, author of “American Pictures and their
     Painters.” With numerous Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d. net.

These books have found so wide a circle of readers in America that it
has been thought advisable to issue on this side editions which have
been enlarged and brought up to date for the convenience of the
thousands of tourists who, now that foreign travel is permitted, will
find the need of a comprehensive and adequate guide to the art treasures
of Europe. The “stay-at-home,” no less than the tourist, will find
entertainment and information within its pages.


MACEDONIA: A Plea for the Primitive

     By A. GOFF and DR. HUGH A. FAWCETT. With Drawings in colour, pencil
     and line. Demy 8vo. £1 1s. net.

_Times._--“A pleasant surprise--it will bring pleasure to the reader
delighted at last to find a work which leaves soldier-work and policies
on one side and devotes itself to the discussion of what is nice in
Macedonia instead of labouring to expose once again that which is
nasty.”


JOHN LANE, THE BODLEY HEAD, VIGO ST., W.1 “_The most thrilling volume
of the year._”--DAILY MAIL.

SOME EXPERIENCES OF A NEW GUINEA RESIDENT MAGISTRATE

     By Captain C. A. W. MONCKTON, F.R.G.S., F.Z.S., F.R.A.I. With
     numerous Illustrations. Fourth Edition. Demy 8vo. £1 1s. net.

Robert Lynd in the _Daily News_.--“Captain Monckton has a lively pen. He
has enjoyed his life among savages ... and his book is written with the
zest of a schoolboy ... a frank and cheerful book.”

_Times Literary Supplement._--“Mr. Monckton has written a boys’ book for
men. In it something happens on every page.... It is a long book, though
not a page too long.”

_Daily Mail._--“A book of entrancing interest for boys and their
fathers. It is a plain and a true one, and is stranger than fiction. The
most remarkable book of travel and exploration since Stanley’s ‘Darkest
Africa.’”


UNCONDUCTED WANDERERS

     By ROSITA FORBES. With over 70 Illustrations from photographs by
     the Author and others. Demy 8vo. 12s. 6d. net.

“Unconducted Wanderers” is a very amusing travel book of the best sort.
After a spell of war work the author and a woman friend went to America,
and thence to the South Seas, to Java, the Malay States, Siam, Cambodia,
China and Korea. The book is extremely lively in tone and fresh in
feeling, and the observations and experiences of the travellers,
particularly in China during the Rebellion, are of quite unusual
interest.

_Evening Standard._--“Those in search of the perfect companion for a
lazy afternoon in a hammock will find their wants admirably supplied by
‘Unconducted Wanderers.’ Their Adventures are retailed with an unfailing
humorous touch, and the scenery and occupants of these far foreign
strands are painted in descriptive language which is always vivid, and
at times beautiful.”


JOHN LANE, THE BODLEY HEAD, VIGO ST., W. 1


TOPEE AND TURBAN, or Here and There, in India

     By Lieut.-Colonel H. A. NEWELL, I.A., With Illustrations from
     photographs. Demy 8vo. £1 1s. net.

_Daily News._--“An excellent book.... Colonel Newell has a quick eye for
things seen, and a happy interest in history that makes the book
something more than a motorist’s guide-book.... Fully illustrated with
photographs of great interest and variety.”

_Daily Mail._--“Everyone ought to know more about India, and a pleasant
way of informing oneself is offered by Colonel Newell’s ‘Topee and
Turban in India.’”

_Times._-“A record of several motor trips in India, abundantly
illustrated, and discursive to just the appropriate length.”

_Westminster Gazette._--“In this book Colonel Newell shows that he has
been a close student and observer of many things in India and Indian
life.”


JAPANESE IMPRESSIONS

     By PAUL LOUIS COUCHOUD. Translated from the French “Sages et Poètes
     d’Asie,” by FRANCES RUMSEY, with a specially written Preface by
     ANATOLE FRANCE. Demy 8vo. 7s. 6d. net.

This book consists of the impressions of Japan of a keen observer, a
scholar, and a remarkable master of language. “The charm of M.
Couchoud,” says Monsieur Anatole France, “lies in that rare power to
evoke ancient or distant facts which is the faculty of a Renan and a
Ferrero, and which touches history with the interest of a living
spectacle.” The book contains a long and highly characteristic
introduction by Monsieur Anatole France, which has never been printed in
French.


ART AND I

By C. LEWIS HIND. Crown 8vo. 10s. 6d. net.


JOHN LANE, THE BODLEY HEAD, VIGO ST., W. 1


A DWELLER IN MESOPOTAMIA

     By DONALD MAXWELL, author of “The Last Crusade,” etc. With numerous
     Illustrations by the Author in colour, half-tone, and line. Crown
     4to. £1 5s. net.

_Morning Post._--“The sketches are particularly attractive, both in
subject and expression, and all are faithfully reproduced.... Altogether
this is a delightful volume, chastely bound in green and brown-toned
linen.”

_Evening Standard._--“A delightful sketch book.... His adventures are
told in breezy, unofficial style.”

_Observer._--“Mr. Maxwell’s receptive eye and delicate hand.”

_Outlook._--“His illustrations are eloquent of the fascinations of the
ancient East ... makes interesting reading.”

_Daily Telegraph._--“Mr. Donald Maxwell’s previous book, ‘The Last
Crusade,’ was a happy mixture of art and literature dealing with
Palestine, and his new volume, ‘A Dweller in Mesopotamia,’ is, we think,
even a happier combination, for while the art is as true and as
excellent as ever, the descriptions of the people he met and the
adventures he experienced are more vivid, varied, and entertaining....
The book will be treasured by those who value good artistic work and
racy description.”


A PAINTER IN PALESTINE

     Being a story of an impromptu pilgrimage through the Holy Land with
     Bible and Sketch Book. By DONALD MAXWELL, author of “Adventures
     with a Sketch-Book,” etc. With an Introduction by the Dean of
     Rochester. Illustrated by the Author. Crown 8vo. 5s. net.


JOHN LANE, THE BODLEY HEAD, VIGO ST., W. 1





End of Project Gutenberg's The Spanish Royal Tapestries, by Albert F. Calvert

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SPANISH ROYAL TAPESTRIES ***

***** This file should be named 60790-0.txt or 60790-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/0/7/9/60790/

Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images available at The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
