The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Sheriff of Pecos, by Henry Bedford-Jones

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Sheriff of Pecos

Author: Henry Bedford-Jones

Release Date: November 26, 2019 [EBook #60797]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SHERIFF OF PECOS ***




Produced by Al Haines








[Illustration: Cover art]



  The Sheriff of Pecos


  BY

  H. BEDFORD-JONES



  GARDEN CITY NEW YORK
  DOUBLEDAY, PAGE & COMPANY
  1923




  COPYRIGHT, 1923, BY
  DOUBLEDAY, PAGE & COMPANY

  ALL RIGHTS RESERVED, INCLUDING THAT OF TRANSLATION
  INTO FOREIGN LANGUAGES, INCLUDING THE SCANDINAVIAN

  COPYRIGHT, 1921, BY STREET & SMITH CORPORATION

  PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES
  AT
  THE COUNTRY LIFE PRESS, GARDEN CITY, N. Y.

  _First Edition_




  CONTENTS

  CHAPTER

  I. Jack Robinson
  II. Exit Matt Brady
  III. Robinson's Partner
  IV. Buck Lays Plans
  V. Buck's Lucky Day
  VI. Proof
  VII. Masks Off
  VIII. Exit Mr. P. Brady
  IX. Fisher Rides North
  X. The Last Stake
  XI. The Trap Is Sprung
  XII. The Clean-Up
  XIII. Finis




THE SHERIFF OF PECOS



CHAPTER I

JACK ROBINSON

Besides "Galway" Mike, who was reading the Pahrump County _News_
behind the bar, there were three men in Mike's Place.  One of the
three was a stranger.  He sat drowsily at the corner table, hat
pulled over his eyes, whisky untasted.  The other two stood at the
bar.

The tall, dangerous man who had a rattler skin about his white
Stetson was speaking:

"It's like this, Murphy.  Right after the old man died, young Shumway
went to the pen.  He was caught dead to rights with a runnin' iron,
y' understand----"

"So I heard."  The large, red-faced man chuckled.  "So I heard, Buck."

Buck grunted.  "Well, Frank Shumway went to the pen; I was sorry,
too----"

"Oh, sure!" commented Murphy sarcastically.  "Made you weep a lot,
huh?"

"Shut your blamed mouth!" retorted Buck, acid in his voice.  "Here's
the point: Young Shumway had mortgaged the hull place to some cussed
bank over in Laredo County--some bank the ol' man had knowed.  Well,
he give Estella the money, y' understand, and went to the pen.
Estella, she's run the place since, but it ain't paid her."

"She's his sister, eh?"  Mr. Murphy's red, aggressive features spread
into a greasy grin.  "Well, I reckon it ain't paid her, with you fer
a neighbor!  But go on, go on."

"Don't let your brain git too agile, Murphy," said Buck, tossing down
his whisky and pouring another drink.  "The place has run down.  All
she's got there now is Miguel Cervantes and his woman, helpin' her.
Not a head o' stock left."

"You done well, then," put in Murphy, who stood in no awe of his
companion evidently.  "You sure done well!  Ol' Shumway had a
powerful lot o' cattle.  Least, he had when I was down here, time the
boy got caught and sent over the road----"

"Times have changed since then," said Buck hastily.  "As I say,
Stella can't make the place pay, in spite of everything.
Cervantes----"

"Done heard of him in the Panhandle.  Ain't he the greaser with a big
rep----"

Buck emitted a lurid oath.

"He's the one, all right--the cussed greaser!  Got a rep, and
everybody's scared to lay into him.  Well, they lost stock, y'
understand; the place is run down; and now it's near time for the
mortgage to be paid--which it won't."

Murphy touched his companion's arm cautiously, and glanced at the
bartender.

"Him?" Buck grinned, then leaned across the bar.  "Hey, Mike!  Tell
my friend Murphy here who owns a half interest in this joint, you
understand?"

Galway Mike looked up from his newspaper, grinning.  His broad, flat
face was unspeakably brutal, its brutality much aided by wide
nostrils which at some previous date had been crushed flat and had
never entirely recovered their beauty.

He looked at Buck, roughly elegant in his corduroys, fine boots, and
handsome gun belt; then he looked at Murphy, whose elegance was more
pronounced, but equally rough and ready.

"Same gent that owns the Runnin' Dawg outfit, yer honor," he
responded.  "More by token, he's the only wan, barrin' yourself, who
does be wearin' a coat these days."

Buck, taking a handful of cigars from his corduroy coat pocket, laid
them on the bar.

"C'rect, Mike," he assented proudly.  "Smoke.  And give us that new
bottle."

The bartender obeyed.  He cocked an eye at the stranger at the table,
but the latter had allowed his head to droop.  His mouth hung open.
He was palpably asleep--dusty, worn out by hard riding, unkempt save
for the gun at his hip, which was excellently cared for.

"Now, as I was sayin'," pursued Buck, who was no other than Templeton
Buck, owner of the Running Dog and a big man in Pahrump County, "that
there mortgage is due.  I been keepin' tabs on things, y' understand?
The place ain't even able to pay the mortgage interest, and I hear
it's been advertised for sale likewise.  All of which don't bother me
none, because when I got your Denver wire that you'd come, I done
bought in the mortgage in your name."

"Oh!" said Murphy, and nodded heavily.  "I s'pose you got reason for
being so roundabout?"

"Plenty.  The reason's Stella, savvy?  I ain't aiming to figger none
in this, except as the rescue party.  Y' understand, the Shumway
place controls all the water supply on my east section, and I got to
have it; but I got to have Stella, too."

"Oh, I savvy plenty," and Murphy nodded again.  "But s'pose anybody
with money buys in the place and pays off the mortgage?"

"He won't," said Buck, his thin, high-boned features showing a slight
grimace.  "I'm havin' it well understood that the place is mine.
Nobody in these here parts is goin' to start buckin' my hand, y'
understand?  There's only one feller might try it; Sam Fisher, a guy
who was a powerful friend of the Shumways in other times.  But he's
clear down to the other end the State, and I'm havin' him watched."

Murphy had straightened up a trifle.

"You don't mean young Fisher, the deputy sheriff o' Pecos County--him
that's goin' to be sheriff there next election?  I'll tell the world
you'd better watch him.  Buck!  That gent is one hell ringer.  Yes,
sir, I've heard of him."

Buck grinned and lifted his glass.  "Don't worry.  He ain't goin' to
butt into this here show, none whatever!  That mortgage comes due the
first of the month--two weeks.  I figger to run her slow until then,
watch Fisher so's he can't hear from the girl----"

"Don't monkey with the mails, Buck!"  Murphy frowned uneasily.

"I ain't," and the tall rancher chuckled.  "I got plenty friends, y'
understand.  Say, you take it easy here until I see about them
hosses, and we'll ride out.  Mike, you 'tend to makin' Murphy plumb
comfortable, and I'll see you in short order."

Buck left the place.

Murphy leaned over the bar and engaged Galway Mike in low-toned
conversation.  Of this talk, a few scattered fragments might have
reached the ear of the stranger in the corner, had not the latter
been utterly relaxed in shameless slumber.

"----that's the gent to be watchin', yer honor--ain't a bad
greaser--divil wid a gun, they do be sayin'--some o' the byes ought
to be layin' fer him some night----"

The swinging doors opened abruptly, silently.  A man stood in the
entrance, stepped swiftly to one side, and stood there with his
dark-glinting eyes, looking about the interior.  He was tall, rangy,
his skin swarthy of hue; he was coated with dust and perspiration.
Despite the high, sharp lines of his features, they were much given
to smiling.  The hair at his temples was gray, and deep lines were
chiseled about lips and eyes.

Galway Mike grabbed a towel and began to mop the bar.

"The top o' the mornin' to ye, Miguel Cervantes!" he exclaimed.
"What'll it be now?"

Murphy started slightly, turned, and surveyed the new arrival with
insolent eyes.

"Thanks, nothing," said Cervantes, speaking perfect English--as
indeed he ought to, since his ancestors had lived in the county for a
hundred years.  "I was looking for someone."

His eyes met those of Murphy.  The latter spoke challengingly:

"Meaning me, maybe?"

"No, not you," and Cervantes smiled, seeming to take no heed of the
tone and look.  "Another gentleman."

He turned away as though to leave.  The hand of Murphy dropped like a
flash.

At this instant there was a crash from the corner where the stranger
had been sitting, followed by a low yell.  Murphy abandoned his gun,
quick as lightning, and turned.  Cervantes also turned.  The stranger
was standing there, rocking unsteadily on his feet, before his
overturned chair.

"Thunderation!" the stranger cried with a perplexed air.  "Blamed if
I didn't have the worst nightmare you ever heard of, gents; I'm a
terrible person for them things!  Sure's my name's Jack Robinson, I
was goin' through a reg'lar gun fight, and me the most peaceable man
ever stepped!  Ain't it awful what can happen in your sleep?"

With his hat off and standing erect, he was revealed as a tall, slim
young man, garbed in usual puncher style.  Beneath his close-clipped
reddish hair beamed a brown, laughing face which compelled smiles
from those who met the steady eyes.  That is, sometimes; behind the
smile of those eyes there lurked something deeper.

His gaze met the scowl of Murphy, and forced the scowl into a half
smile.  Then his eyes went to Cervantes, who was staring open-mouthed.

"Hope I didn't disturb you none, gents," he said apologetically.
Then he looked again at Murphy.  The smile vanished from his face,
which assumed a look of malicious recognition.

"Well, well!" he said briskly.  "If here ain't my old friend
'Pincher' Brady, what was asked to leave Montana for his health's
sake five years ago----"

"Look out you don't make a mistake, mister," said the voice of
Murphy, biting and deadly.  "What'd you say your name was?"

"Sure's my name's Jack Robinson, I done made a mistake," said the
other at once, and shook his head.  "I'm right sorry about it,
pardner.  You looked a heap like a gent named Brady who was up in
Montana one time, but now I see you ain't him a-tall."

"No, he ain't," said Murphy, steadily observing him.  "Now you've
seen the mistake, let's have a drink, hey?"

"Cigar for mine, thanks."  Jack Robinson stepped to the bar, picking
up his hat as he came, and his genial smile brought a nod from Mike.
He picked up one of the cigars laid down by Buck and pocketed it.

Miguel Cervantes unobtrusively left.

"I'm a stranger here, and mighty lonesome," said Robinson with an air
of confidential inquiry.  "I don't s'pose you gents could direct me?"

Galway Mike looked at Murphy, who made, answer:

"We might.  Where to?"

Robinson leaned one elbow on the bar, and surveyed Murphy with
piercing, laughing, reckless eyes.

"Upon my word," he drawled, "your voice sounds a heap like Pincher
Brady's, pardner!"

The two men looked at each other.  The red face of Murphy became
redder.  With a laugh, Robinson flung about as though to face the
bar--and the hand of Murphy darted down.

Crack!  The bursting report of a revolver filled the place.

"I was looking for that," Robinson said coolly.  "No, Mike, you leave
that gun alone; I'd be right sorry to have to hurt you."

Mike straightened up.  Clinging to the bar with his left hand, Murphy
looked down at his right, which was wounded.

"You got quite a reputation for workin' that play," said Robinson,
backing away toward the swinging doors. "You're lucky I didn't make
it worse, Brady, but bein's I'm a stranger here I ain't taking
chances on local prejudices----"

The swinging doors were burst inward as a group of men rushed into
the place, holding the doors open.  Robinson calmly stood behind the
inner door, which had opened against him and held him concealed from
sight.

"Who's shootin' here?" demanded the foremost man.

"I am," said Robinson, stepping out.  "Got any objections?"

They faced around to meet his weapon.  Over it his eyes held them; no
longer smiling, those eyes were keen and bitter blue.

"Objections overruled," he went on coolly.  "You gents oughtn't come
busting into a place o' business like this.  It ain't proper.  Here I
was just showin' Mike how the draw was done where I come from, and I
get interrupted----"

"We ain't strong on learning things, stranger," said the foremost
man.  "I'm sheriff of Pahrump County--  Tracy.  These deputies of
mine were in next door with me----"

"Right convenient, weren't you?" asked Robinson coolly.  "Keep 'em
up--up!  That's right.  Right convenient, as I said.  And you come in
a-runnin', gents.  Lookin' for something special, were you?"

The sheriff changed countenance.

"Why," he stammered, "I understood a greaser was makin' trouble
here----"

"And who might have gave you to understand such?" shot in Robinson.
The sheriff made no answer, but bit his mustache.  "Turned dumb, have
you?  It does beat all how things happen, don't it?  Here I come in,
plumb peaceable and lovin' my neighbors, and, first thing I know, a
ruckus gets started.  Now, you gents look at Mr. Murphy, over yonder,
who done got his hand ripped a little.  Ain't even busted, is she?"

Murphy was not hurt to any great extent, and proved it by his voluble
cursing.

"Ease off steam; that's right," said Robinson soothingly.
"Satisfied, sheriff?"

"Plenty," said the officer.

Robinson put away his weapon.  "Glad to meet you, Sheriff Tracy.
Mike, give the gentlemen a drink and charge it to Mr. Murphy.  Guess
I'll be on my way, gents.  Got to be in Laredo in two days, and I
sure have lost time here.  So long."

He was gone.  The sheriff and his two deputies looked at each other
irresolutely, glanced at Galway Mike, and then retired likewise,
without their drink.  Mike gave Murphy a glance of scorn.

"You sure bungled it!" he said raspingly.

Murphy swore appropriately.  "Bungled it!" he repeated.  "I was a
cussed fool ever to try it on with that gent, I can tell you!  Next
time it'll be a Winchester and a hilltop!"

A sneer curled the bartender's lip.  "Foine sort of a killer, you
are!" he returned.  "Oh, ye needn't to be scowlin' at me; I ain't
bein' scart o' no man, and I got me fist on a gun to boot, Mister
Murphy!  Niver mind the scowl now.  Have a drink an' forget it."

The doors were flung open again, and Buck strode into the place.

"The greaser!" he exclaimed sharply.  "Did you get him?"

Mr. Murphy cursed.




CHAPTER II

EXIT MATT BRADY

Two men were riding away from the town of Pahrump together.  One was
Miguel Cervantes, the other was Jack Robinson.

"You ran mighty close back there, Cervantes," said the younger man
soberly.  "That fellow was Pincher Brady--a killer.  Only, he always
kills in the back, savvy?  He was going for you when I jumped up."

Cervantes nodded and flashed white teeth in a smile.

"I was not watching him," he confessed.  "I was looking for someone,
as I said.  Every day I have come, but no luck."

"Maybe you drew a little luck to-day," and Robinson chuckled.  "I
don't suppose, by any chance, you were looking for Sam Fisher?"

Cervantes started.  His dark eyes centered upon his companion.

"You know him?"

"Pretty well," said Robinson in an offhand way.  "He was being
watched and couldn't get away.  So he deputized me to come along, as
it were.  You're the Lazy S foreman?"

"I used to be," said Cervantes bitterly.

They talked.  Cervantes spoke quietly, changing swiftly between
smiles and anger.  Three years previously young Shumway had been
railroaded to the penitentiary.  Estella, his sister, had run the
ranch since then--and it had gone to ruin.  Not her fault or that of
Cervantes, who was devotion personified.

"Cattle have vanished," Cervantes said in a hopeless tone.  "We have
gone steadily down--let the men go one by one to cut expenses.  Last
year what remained of the stock was sold off to pay the mortgage
interest."

"I shouldn't think your friends would let things go that way," said
Robinson.

"Friends?  We have none.  There is only old Jake Harper, who has the
Circle Bar up beyond us.  None of the others help us or know us.  New
people have come into the country; times have changed.  Besides----"

"Templeton Buck?" suggested Robinson.

"Yes.  They have tried often to get me," was the statement, simply
given, "but for the sake of Miss Estella I have avoided offense.  The
Running Dog punchers make what use they like of our place; their
foreman, Matt Brady, has even dared to fence in the springs adjoining
the Buck ranch."

"Brady?" said Robinson suddenly, his eyes narrowing.  "Matt Brady?"

"Yes."  Cervantes gave him a questioning glance.

"Uh-huh--thought so!  Pincher Brady's brother.  That explains how
they came to hire Pincher for their dirty work.  But they wouldn't
bring Pincher here simply to get you, would they?  No.  Quite a nice,
nifty little scheme on foot, Miguel.  By the way, I don't suppose
this Jake Harper is a decrepit old party who was a scout for Reno
during the Indian wars?"

"You know him, then?"

"Know of him, more or less."  Robinson chuckled silently.  "Think
I'll go over to his place and have a chat.  What's that crossroads
ahead?"

"Straight on to the Running Dog and Harper's," responded Cervantes.
"We turn off to the left.  You don't mean you're not going with me?"

"Cross my heart and hope to die--I'm not," and Robinson grinned.
"But I'll be along in a day or two if I don't meet bad luck.  By the
way, who had anything to do with Frank's being sent to the pen?"

A black frown settled on the face of Cervantes.

"Nobody," he answered.  "We don't know a thing against any one.  Two
detectives----"

"Oh, I see," said Robinson airily.  "Well, I guess I'll be moving
straight ahead, so don't sit up for me to-night.  See you later."

They parted at the crossroads.  Cervantes swung off to the left,
plainly failing to comprehend this queer young man of strange
impulses, and waved his hand in farewell.  Jack Robinson jogged along
reflectively, thinking of the man who had just left him.

"A faithful soul," he observed to his pinto.  "Absolutely devoted
boy, isn't he?  Quick tempered, a wonder with his gun, and yet
backing water all the time because he's afraid Estella would be left
alone in the world if they wiped him out.  Some man, Miguel!  But
none too bright.  Give the devil his due, Johnny boy; a good man,
only not quite good enough.  He couldn't prevent the ranch going to
the dogs, although he's ready to die with it.  No, they wouldn't
bring Pincher just to rub him out.  Matt Brady could do that.  And
they wouldn't bring Pincher just to handle that mortgage affair.
There's a nigger in the woodpile, and that nigger is----"

His meditations were interrupted by sight of a rolling train of dust
in the road ahead.  He eyed it sharply and made out the forms of two
riders coming toward him.

They met, and drew rein with casual nods of greeting, searching
looks, and frank curiosity.  Robinson beheld two rangy punchers who
rode with Winchesters booted.  Their mounts bore the long sear of the
Running Dog.  One of them was a ratty individual with protruding
teeth, the other was a large man, red-faced, of aggressive aspect.

"Must be a heap o' war in this country," opined Robinson with a
friendly grin as he rolled a smoke.  "More rifles'n I ever seen
before at one stretch!"

"You must ha' come from quiet parts, then," said the big man.  "That
cayuse bears a brand strange hereabouts."

"That's true.  Sure's my name's Jack Robinson, friend, that's true!
Still the old SF has been supportin' me for two years or so--down in
the south country."

"I'm Matt Brady, foreman; this here's 'Lias Knute," introduced Brady.
"If you've come out lookin' for a job at the Runnin' Dawg, we'd be
right glad to have you turn in, Robinson.  Need a few extry hands
right now."

Robinson blew a cloud of smoke and shook his head regretfully.

"Later, mebbe.  Me, I got business over to Laredo."

"Laredo?" The foreman stared.  "This ain't the Laredo road, ye
numskull!"

"Ain't it, now?" said the other sweetly.  "I never 'lowed it was, did
I?"

Brady scowled.  "Where ye headin' for?" he demanded bluntly.

"Did I say?  Guess I forgot to mention it."  Robinson's slow grin was
irritating in the extreme.  Ratty little Knute edged his cayuse a
trifle to one side.

"Better remember it pronto."  Brady's tone was significant.  His eyes
were stormy.

"Well," said Robinson gayly, "I done voted twice already, I ain't
roped to any brand, and, far's I can see, my skin's white.  This here
ain't no private road, is it?"

Brady stared at him murderously.  Knute edged a trifle farther to the
side.  Robinson appeared quite unruffled and innocent of offense.

"Stranger, are you jest plain fool, or ignerant?" demanded Brady.

"Both," Robinson said with a grin.  "By the way, I s'pose you ain't
related to Pincher Brady?  He was havin' considerable excitement in
town when I come through."

The big foreman settled into a deadly calm.  "Yes?  How come?"

"Bein' a stranger and peaceable, I didn't stop to ask," returned
Robinson idly.  "Seems like some feller named Buck sent him to get a
gent.  He got the wrong gent, and him and Buck were shootin' it out."

From the two men broke startled oaths.  The ratty little Knute saw
the twinkle in Robinson's eye, and cried out shrilly:

"He's stringin' us, Matt!  Somethin' fishy about this guy----"

Robinson was in the center of the road, Brady before him, Knute off
to his left.  He appeared entirely careless and off guard, cigarette
between his fingers.

"Tryin' to ride me, are ye?" Brady queried.  "Want trouble, do ye?"

"I'd welcome it," said Robinson.

"Then take it----"

Brady's gun flashed up.  The miracle happened; Robinson's six-shooter
seemed to leap out of itself, jump into his hand, spit fire.  The two
guns spoke almost together.  Brady swayed in the saddle, clutched at
the pommel, and rolled down.

But it had been a murder trap.  Robinson had no chance whatever.
Even as he fired, he saw from, the corner of his eye that Knute, to
the left, was tugging at a gun.  He saw the gun come up, and tried to
swing himself around in time.  Too late!  The gun in the hand of
ratty little Knute belched once.

Incredulously, bewildered, deeming himself already a dead
man---Robinson found himself unharmed.  Nor was he given any chance
to shoot.  The whole affair had passed in the fraction of a second;
Matt Brady's vicious attack and death, the third shot echoing
treacherously from the side, almost with the first two.  As he turned
to the assassin, Robinson was amazed to see Knute sink forward, the
weapon falling from his hand.

Knute said no word, but followed his gun to the dirt.  He lay
motionless, one spur in the stirrup; a splotch of red grew upon his
chest.  He had been shot---how?  Not by himself; nor by Robinson.

As the fraction of a second passed Robinson's head jerked up to a
sound.  He heard the crack of a rifle lifting to him--so swiftly had
the whole affair passed!  It was the shot which killed Knute; the
rifle crack that followed the bullet.

Robinson stared around.  The country appeared empty, the rolling
hills desolate, the brown strip of road quite bare of any person.
Whence had come that shot?

"Somebody quite a distance off had the pleasure of saving my life,"
said Robinson reflectively.  "Well, if he doesn't want to show
himself--I'm satisfied!  I wasted a good lie on Matt Brady; too bad
he didn't get to go to town and investigate his brother's trouble.
Murder trap?  Not the first these two gentlemen have laid, I'll bet!
They sure caught me, all right.  Would have had me, except for the
unknown friend.  Friend, I thank you!"

He swept off his black Stetson, waved it to the nearest hill, and
rode on his way.

"Here's hoping the verdict will be that Knute and Brady killed each
other," he thought.  "Maybe it won't and maybe it will, depending on
who the jury are and how well they can read tracks.  Chances are that
I won't be mentioned; this country seems to favor direct action
rather than legal inquiry.  Ho, hum!  Matt came near to spoiling my
nice new black hat by putting his bullet through it.  That's what
happens to a slow man.  I'd sure hate to be slow around here, you
bet!  But I'd admire to know who handled that rifle in the brush.
Couldn't even make out where it was, what direction.  Interesting
country, Pahrump!  I certainly think the geological formations are
fine."

Two men dead--well, it was a serious matter enough, and promised to
grow darker with time.  Matt Brady and Knute were evidently used to
working together; their trap had been well prepared, well sprung.
Only the presence of some unknown watcher had saved Robinson from
that side bullet.  Who was the person?  Not Miguel Cervantes, for the
native had carried no rifle.

Robinson jogged along, his mind busy with the situation of Estella
Shumway.  There were some things he did not understand, but
comprehension would come in course of time.  Templeton Buck seemed to
be the big power in the county, to judge from that conversation in
Galway Mike's place, and Buck apparently had it all fixed to take
over the Shumway ranch in the near future--and Estella likewise.

Upon passing the turnout that led to the Running Dog, Robinson drew
rein and studied the ground in some surprise.  He had followed the
back trail of Brady and Knute, but to his astonishment saw that they
had not come from the Running Dog at all.  They had come from some
point beyond it--and the only point beyond it that Robinson knew of
was Jake Harper's ranch.  This looked queer.

Robinson passed on, wondering why these Running Dog men had come from
the Circle Bar, particularly as Jake Harper and Templeton Buck were
not friends.  That would mean bad blood between the two outfits.

"Time will tell that, too, and the afternoon's drawing along,"
thought Robinson.  "We'd better travel along, little doggies!  Hit
her up, Johnny boy, and we'll feast to-night with the Injun fighter
and frontier guardian.  Oh, shucks!  Here's another guy coming with a
rifle and looks like business in his eye, too!"

He drew up at sight of a horseman who had suddenly appeared in the
road ahead, riding toward him.  On closer sight, this man appeared to
be a young fellow, whose right leg had been freshly bandaged above
the knee; chaps and trousers were bundled behind him on the saddle,
and from waist to boots his costume consisted of red flannel.  He
reined in before Robinson and nodded greeting, his eye running over
the stranger critically.

"Howdy, pilgrim!  Jest out from town?"

"C'rect the first shot, sure's my name's Jack Robinson!" was the
cheerful response.  "And I'd admire to know who's settin' the new
range styles this-away!  I never did see such fine red color in all
my days.  I'll have to get me some underwear that same shade."

The young fellow chuckled.  "My name's Arnold," he offered.  "By that
brand, you must ha' come up from the south, Robinson?  Used to be
down in Pecos County my ownself, last year; was ridin' for ol' man
Zimmer."

"Then," drawled Robinson, "I reckon you done heard of Pete Hendricks?"

"Friend of yours?" queried Arnold.

"Yep."

"Shake."  Arnold suddenly beamed in a wide grin and extended his
hand.  The two shook vigorously.  "Me and Pete was sure some bunkies.
Say, I most forgot!  Did you meet a couple of riders back a ways?"

Robinson inspected him quizzically.

"Friends of yours?" he retorted.  Arnold flushed violently and
pointed to his underwear.

"Does that look like it?"

Robinson began to roll a cigarette.  "If I was you, cowboy, I'd waste
no more time lookin' farther for them two gents.  No, sir, it'd be an
awful waste of time, and, accordin' to looks, you got no time to
waste."

"Meaning what, pardner?"  Arnold inspected him, narrow-eyed, cautious.

"Just this."  Robinson finished his cigarette and tucked it between
his lips.  "Feller named Buck was in Pahrump to-day, meetin' a friend
on the stage.  Friend called himself Murphy, but his real handle was
Pincher Brady, savvy?  Them two gents was due to leave town shortly
behind me, riding thisa-way.  Now, when they get to where I got, back
apiece, they're going to meet up with them same two gents you made
mention of--same being Matt Brady and a little rat name o' Knute.  Do
you foller?"

"Right behind," said Arnold, thin-lipped, watchful.  "Elucidate!"

"Why, that's about all of it, I reckon!"  Robinson touched a match to
his cigarette.  "Only, when the first two meet up with the last two,
there's going to be a heap of grief spilled.  I don't guess Pincher
Brady has much fraternal affection to spoil; same time, it's bound to
be a shock, meetin' his brother like that."

"Oh!" said Arnold.  "By gosh, d'you mean to say----"

"I ain't sayin' at all," and Robinson smiled whimsically.  "Only I
darned near got this new hat ruined.  Somebody's goin' to get blamed
for what happened.  Maybe it'll be me, and maybe you, accordin' to
which one Buck sees first.  By the way, ain't that a Circle Bar brand
on your hoss?"

"So taken and accepted."  Arnold was staring at him hard now.
"S'pose you and me ride back a ways, Robinson--same way you was
heading."

"How come?"  Robinson surveyed him with lifted brows.

"I got orders to keep with you, that's all."  Arnold did not appear
hostile--quite the contrary, in fact--but his attitude was
determined.  "You ain't been using your eyes real good, have you?"

"Seems not."  Robinson frowned.  "Orders to meet me?  How in thunder
did you get 'em?"

Arnold grinned.  "Smoke signal.  Do you agree?  I'd sure hate to have
any trouble with a red-headed gent that had knowed Pete Hendricks,
but at the same time I aims to obey orders----"

"No apologies necessary."  Robinson laughed softly.  "Arnold, I guess
you and I will hitch without any trouble.  So Jake is using Injun
smoke signals, is he?  Same old boy as ever.  Where is he?"

"Comin' behind you, I reckon," said Arnold dryly.

Robinson uttered a low whistle.  "The darned old fox!  So that's who
it was!  Let's ride, cowboy; let's ride."

Arnold turned his horse, and they rode stirrup to stirrup.




CHAPTER III

ROBINSON'S PARTNER

Jake Harper had once been a very large man.  Now he was a little
bowed with age, a bit heavy with superfluous flesh, his hair quite
white, his face seamed with heavy lines.  The old eyes were keen as
ever; the heavy mustache, fresh dyed a lustrous black, gave the
beholder a decided shock when contrasted with white hair and brows.
He rode a huge, rawboned beast whose eye was roving and vicious--a
brute named Celestine.  No man but Jake had ever ridden her, and no
man wanted to.  Celestine had a reputation.

When he came upon Arnold and Robinson waiting in the road, Jake
Harper drew rein very abruptly.  At sight of Robinson's laughing
gaze, a shock of surprise crossed his seamed features.  His eyes
opened wide.

"For the love of Mike!" he uttered.  "_You!_"

"C'rect the first shot as usual, Jake.  Sure's my name's Jack
Robinson, it's me!  I been having quite a bit o' talk with Arnold;
friendly and peaceable.  How're you, Jake?"

They shook hands warmly.  Suddenly old Jake broke into a storm of
affectionate curses.  His huge paw pounded Robinson on the back again
and again.

"Boy, I'm glad to see ye!" he cried, lustily roaring the words.
"Dog-gone it, I'm the happiest man in the Territory--State, I mean.
Hurray!  By gosh, if I'd knowed it was you under that black hat----"

"Uh-huh."  Robinson's eyes crinkled.  "I thought you was layin' up
there in the brush, most likely.  Right here and now, Jake, I utters
heartfelt thanks.  Sure's my name's Jack Robinson, I ain't a bit
scart to explore the other world, but I don't aim to do it any sooner
than I have to.  If you hadn't attended to Mr. Knute, I'd certain
sure be wandering lonesome and lonely the other side Jordan this
minute.  That's what comes of bein' a stranger, now.  Say, Sam Fisher
said to tell you he couldn't get away, so I come instead."

"Huh?"  Jake Harper puffed out his cheeks.  "Oh, he did, did he?
Durned fool, that Sam Fisher!  Got a big repytation and ain't got the
nerve to live up to it!  Hey, Arnold!  What in time are you exposin'
your flannels for thataway?"

Arnold grinned.  "I got swiped by a long-distance bee, thirty-thirty
caliber," he said.  "If you ain't got no objections, Jake, where's
Matt Brady and Knute?"

Jake Harper twirled his vivid black mustache.  "I dunno," he
responded thoughtfully.  "I could make a blamed good guess where they
ain't, though; they ain't reposin' on no fleecy clouds with a harp in
each hand!  This here Jack Robinson is severeal seconds faster'n Matt
Brady was, Arnold; yes, sir, severeal!  Guess I'd better give him a
job, hadn't I?"

Arnold put out his hand to Robinson again, and they shook.  "Guess
you had, Jake," he responded.  "They tried the old game on the
stranger, eh?  Knute off to one side?"

"Uh-huh--blamed near got him, too, only I was watchin' the trail.
Let's travel, gents.  We got to git home 'fore dark."

"You seem to have met before," observed Arnold.

"Once or twice," said Robinson, and chuckled.  A huge billow of
laughter shook the big frame of Jake Harper, as though there were
some unuttered joke.

After this they rode on in silence.  Jake Harper, old Indian fighter,
ex-scout, plainsman, and borderer, was plainly in high fettle over
the day's events.  Every now and again his eye rested upon the slim
figure of Jack Robinson, and a vast good humor rolled into his
features.  The presence of this young man appeared hugely gratifying
to him.

"Ain't been so happy," he blurted, breaking the silence only once,
"since me and ol' John Parker met up with Gen'ral Reno one day in San
Francisco, all three of us plumb lonesome, and not knowin' they was a
friend in ten miles.  Sure is good to see ye, boy."

Robinson nodded, but did not respond.

It was dusk when they reached the Harper ranch.  Robinson left his
pinto at the corral, shook hands with half a dozen punchers whom he
could scarcely see, and followed Jake Harper to the big house on the
knoll.  As soon as he set foot in the porch, Jake turned.

"The house is yourn!" he said emphatically.  "Set an' talk!  We eats
with the boys when supper's ready.  Meantime, talk!"

"Suits me."  Robinson dropped into a chair.  "You weren't in town
to-day?"

"Nope."  Jake Harper lowered his bulk into a groaning rocker.  "I got
so danged much rheumatiz lately it's knocked me up.  You didn't meet
Mig Cervantes?"

"Uh-huh.  Met him and Buck and Mike and a man calling himself Murphy,
only he was Matt Brady's brother--Pincher.  Maybe you remember him?
Bad to the backbone."

"You met 'em?" asked Jake Harper.  "All of 'em?"

Robinson laughed softly.  "Yep.  Also Sheriff Tracy.  I left town in
a hurry.  Pincher Brady has a sore hand, but no one was hurt.  By the
way, I had quite a long talk with Frank Shumway last week."

"My lord!  You did?"  Jake Harper was eager, incredulous, astonished.
"How come?  Thought Buck was keeping a close watch on things."

"Sam Fisher sent me up to the pen," Robinson chuckled.  "Frank gets
out next spring.  He's in pretty fair shape, but badly worried.  I
bucked him up and promised we'd take care of everything here.  By the
way, Jake, Templeton Buck has a fine scheme lined out.  He got
Pincher Brady here to handle it.  He bought the Shumway mortgage in
Pincher's name--assumed name, I should say, of Murphy.  He aims to
let Murphy foreclose, then to step up and rescue Estella.  I don't
understand it all myself.  Isn't Estella wise to him?"

Jake Harper tugged at his mustache.

"She is, and she ain't," he returned, rumbling his words.  "Buck,
he's played his cards mighty cute with her, allowing he's done all in
his power to git Frank out of jail and so forth.  Between you and me,
I suspicions that Buck has got a friend in the post office, and that
he ain't above monkeying with letters."

"That's old stuff," said Robinson calmly.  "You folks up here have a
fine county organization, looks like."

The insistent banging of a tin pan interrupted them, and they hastily
departed.

Seated about the chuck table with the half-dozen Circle Bar boys,
Robinson sized up things without much trouble.  Except for Arnold,
the Circle Bar had no young blood at all.  An old Swede and his wife
took care of the place.  The foreman was a grizzled, crippled person
who had helped to run down Geronimo--and held his job on the strength
of it.

The other men were much of the same stamp, all of them elderly, one
or two efficient, but working for Jake Harper because they had
appealed to his soft side, not because they were first-class range
men.  Jake introduced Robinson as a new hand who was going to do some
special work for him, and let it go at that.  Few of the men paid
much attention or seemed interested.

To Robinson the meal was tragic.  He had looked for help here, and
found none.  When it was over, he pushed back his chair and left.
Out in the open air, he found Arnold at his elbow, with a quiet
chuckle.

"Live bunch, ain't it?" opined Arnold.  "Looks to me, Red, like you
was some disappointed."

"What at?" queried Robinson.

"Ain't my business."  Arnold rolled a cigarette with elaborate
carelessness.  "Only, I ain't seen you throw no war bag into a bunk.
I been thinkin' more or less about quittin' here anyhow, and applying
for a job over to the Lazy S."

"Oh!" said Robinson.  "Call you Mister Arnold over there, would they?"

"It's always been Steve around home."

"Oh!  All right, Steve.  You and me, what say we go ridin' for a
change?"

"Your hoss look plumb wore out, Red."

"Maybe we can get Jake to lend us a bit o' flesh.  What about it,
Jake?"  Robinson turned, as Jake Harper joined them under the stars.
"Steve, here, he allows there's too much excitement around these
parts to suit him.  I agrees with him plenty.  Can I put my rope on a
couple of your broncs and get Steve to take me out and show me the
country?"

Jake Harper inspected the two slender figures, hands on his hips.

"Dog-gone it!" he broke out plaintively.  "Here I been ridin' and
crawlin' in the bresh all day, and now you-all aims to go away, and
figgers I'm too blamed wore out to trail along!  Why don't you stick
around and talk a while, Robinson?"

"What you want to go for, Jake?" queried Robinson softly.  "S'pose
Buck and Pincher Brady, or Murphy, comes ridin' along here in about
half an hour to inquire about the red-headed stranger what took the
wrong road to Laredo and met up with Matt Brady and Knute--huh?  If
you wasn't here, where'd I be?  That's a conundrum."

"And what's the answer to the durned thing?" asked the old plainsman.

"That you're the fanciest liar ever I did see, Jake, when it's plumb
necessary.  Also, that you don't give a hoot for Buck--and if you was
setting on your front porch with the lights out and a Winchester
handy, Buck and his friends would be mighty slow about startin' any
ructions with you."

"Oh!" said Jake, fingering his very black mustache.  "I see!  You
think I'd lie to save your worthless neck?"

"You seen Matt Brady draw first, didn't you?"

"Uh-huh, now I think about it--he done so."  Jake Harper chuckled.
"That's all right, boy; I know what's stirrin' in your fool brain,
too.  Ye think the Circle Bar bunch is too old an' helpless to stir
much, huh?  Well, jest you go along.  Take anything you fancy in the
corral, boys, and remember me to Estella.  I'll be over myself in a
day or two."

Arnold and Robinson started away together, and lost themselves in the
shadows near the corral.  Robinson touched his companion's arm.

"Steve, any time you think old Jake is slow, guess again!  Friend
Buck is coming along here pretty soon, and he'll run into a surprise
party.  Meantime, we'll be elsewhere."

Steve Arnold grunted.  "What you want to run for, then?"

"Me?  I ain't running," and Robinson laughed.  "I'm off to see the
country, that's all.  Maybe Miss Shumway will sort of take to me
more, if you introduce me."

Arnold glanced at him suspiciously.

"You tryin' to run some joke on me, Red?"

"None a-tall, Steve; cross my heart!  Sure's my name's Jack Robinson,
I'm a quiet and peaceable stranger what always gets took in.  When
Jake Harper gets done orating to Buck, that affluent gentleman will
give up lookin' for me, except by accident.  He won't be real sure
whether I'm workin' for Jake or not, and the Circle Bar boys won't be
sure neither.  In fact, nobody will be sure of anything, except you
and me.  That's the best way to play her, ain't it?"

"Looks all right," vouchsafed Arnold.  "Got your saddle handy?"

Ten minutes later the two were quietly drawing away from the Circle
Bar without making any effusive farewells.  They had been riding for
perhaps five minutes more, when both pulled up their horses suddenly.
Across the night lifted the faint bang of a shotgun.

"That's Jake's old Brown Bess," said Steve.  "Trouble back of us!"

Robinson held up a hand for silence.  They sat motionless, listening.
No further shot came, and Robinson relaxed with a soft laugh.

"Nope, no trouble.  We slid out just in time, Steve.  Buck comes
riding up, and old Jake salutes him out of the darkness, then
apologizes for the mistake.  Savvy?  Buck accepts the
apology--otherwise we'd have heard real trouble a-starting.  Let's
go, cowboy!"

They merged into the darkness.  The moon would not be up until
midnight.




CHAPTER IV

BUCK LAYS PLANS

Templeton Buck did not particularly enjoy his call at the Circle Bar,
nor did he find its occupants very slow in their reception.  He did
not see any one, in fact, nor did the dozen riders behind him.  The
buildings were dark and apparently deserted, until the blast of a
shotgun ripped the night and Jake Harper's voice accosted the
arrivals boomingly.

The ominous darkness, the more ominous silence, held the Running Dog
men bunched up and nervous.  Harper's words made them more nervous,
when it became evident that Jake had witnessed the shooting on the
road and was perfectly willing to testify to the fact.  Buck made up
his mind to go home and went.

With him went Pincher Brady, alias Murphy, and the dozen riders.
Murphy displayed no great grief for his defunct relative, but he was
savagely disposed toward one Jack Robinson.

Once at the rangy, rather unkempt buildings which served the Running
Dog as headquarters, Buck called Murphy into consultation.  He also
summoned the newly promoted foreman, one "Sandy" Davitt, a sour
individual marred by a cast in one eye.

"We've made a mess of things since this morning, y' understand," Buck
said glumly.  "Murphy failed in town, and this here Robinson gent ran
into a heap of luck headfirst.  He's a flash gunman from somewhere,
and Harper has put him in the bunk house."

"Old Jake has got his back up sudden," observed Sandy Davitt with a
sneer.  "Hope you ain't lost any nerve lately, Buck?  He sure handed
you a mouthful to-night."

Buck swore under his breath.  His thin, raw-boned features were
etched with red.

"He pays for that," he responded.  "You hear me tell it!  They's two
things to be done 'fore Murphy can foreclose on that mortgage.
First, the greaser Cervantes has got to be 'tended to.  Next, Jake
Harper."

"Jake ain't what you'd exactly call a social favrite," said Davitt
dryly.  "Same time, Buck, he's considerable well known as an old boy
and crippled up some.  Public opinion ain't goin' to favor his sudden
demise, none whatever."

"Oh, that's all right," grunted Buck.  "You and Slim and Doggy take
some grub about to-morrow afternoon, and lay up the trail a ways.
Jake will be ridin' over to the Lazy S to-morrow night or next
morning.  You boys rope him, fetch him over here, and we'll let him
cool off a spell while we run that outfit of hisn off the range,
savvy?"

"That's good as she lays, Buck."  Sandy Davitt looked relieved.  "I
thought you was goin' to remark that I might go wrastle with
Cervantes, which same I ain't got no longin' for.  Me, I got a wide
sense of my limitations.  Any gent what undertakes the greaser in
sober earnest has got to be born real lucky, and I wasn't."

"Who'd you suggest?" asked Buck, a lurking devil in his eye.

"You," said the foreman, grinning sourly.  "Looks a whole lot like
whoever wants the work done had ought to be able to handle some part
of it his ownself, don't it?"

Buck was lounging in his chair as this veiled insinuation was
uttered.  Like a streak of light, he was up and in the air.  Powerful
as Sandy Davitt obviously was, he was taken by the throat and laid
back across the table, gasping and strangled.  Holding the man's lean
throttle in one hand, Buck glared down at him.

"Some stuck up over sudden promotion, ain't you, Sandy?" inquired
Buck's voice.  "Feelin' your oats a heap, eh?  That's twice you got
sassy--ain't goin' to be no third time, Sandy.  Or is they?"

"N-no," gasped the half-choked man.  Murphy looked on the scene with
interest, his red features quite calm, a cigar between nis teeth.
"Lemme up, Buck!"

Buck released his hold suddenly, and stepped back, smiling nastily.

"Sure.  Git up, boy, and beat it.  You can tell the others that
Cervantes is my meat--quick meat, likewise.  You and Slim and Doggy
light out of here to-morrow, and if you miss bringin' in Jake Harper,
I'll skin the three of you one-handed!  Git!"

Sandy Davitt departed hurriedly.

"I see," observed Murphy, shifting the cigar in his mouth, "I see you
ain't backward when it comes to action, Buck.  What's the program?"

"You ride over to the Lazy S in the morning," Buck ordered, who was
indeed suddenly displaying a new and alert manner.  "Pull the
mortgage stuff on Estella, polite but firm, savvy?  I know about
where Cervantes will be.  When I'm done with him I'll drop along to
the house and fire you off the premises.  Now set still till I get a
drink."

Buck departed.  Murphy glanced after him, then lighted his cigar
thoughtfully.

"Humph!" he growled.  "I've heard biggity talk 'fore this, Mister
Buck!  If I knows you, which I'd ought to, you ain't ridin' up to
that greaser and pullin' no gun on him--no, sir!  If you git him,
it'll be 'cause he ain't armed, maybe.  Well, let her ride!  All I
want is to git another chance at that smart Aleck, Robinson, who
recognized me for Pincher Brady, cuss him!  He's run up a big day's
score, and I aim to pay him.  By Godfrey, I'd come close to givin'
him an even break, I would!"

With this admirable sentiment, Mr. Murphy inspected his right hand,
whose back was crossed by a big piece of sticking-plaster.  He was
not really injured--the bullet had only scraped his hand slightly.
His black scowl was perhaps induced by memory of the fate which had
overtaken Matt Brady that same day.

Buck was uneasy, and remained uneasy.  He had gone to great lengths
to stage his final play for the Shumway girl and ranch, and saw
himself verging on disaster.  It was all due to that fool Robinson.
He had met Murphy and had drawn him into Mike's place for conference.
He had taken the snoring stranger for granted--and the stranger had
wakened in sudden nightmare, according to the story told by Mike and
by Murphy.  What did it mean?  Had Robinson overheard much of the
talk?  How had he chanced to recognize Murphy as Pincher Brady?--

The fellow had not gone to Laredo at all, but to Jake Harper's.  That
was suspicious.  Where had Robinson come from?  The south, beyond a
doubt; but Buck was unable to discover anything about the man.  Being
thus uneasy, Buck issued stringent orders to his men, and regarded
Robinson's fate as settled.

Upon the following morning, Mr. Murphy mounted and rode away from the
Running Dog by his lonely.  A little later Buck and two of his riders
departed in company.  Later still Sandy Davitt, Slim, and Doggy rode
away together.  The day was clear, brilliant, fairly warm.

Buck and his two men did not follow the road, but made their way by
easy stages to the rolling and wooded section of the Running Dog
which adjoined the fine water springs on the Shumway ranch.  They
knew about what they would find there; it had been the same story day
after day since Matt Brady had undertaken to fence in the Shumway
water.

Every morning Miguel Cervantes rode over that way and spent an hour
cutting fence.  If any of the Running Dog men showed up, Cervantes
would smile and take all that was said and would allow himself to be
ordered away.  If they did not show up, he would finish cutting the
fence and then depart.  Later, Matt Brady would repair the fence.

By this mute and inglorious scheme of tactics, Cervantes caused the
Running Dog some irritation, avoided a row, and registered protest
against high-handed work.  It gained very little, but it was at least
a protest.  It was about all Cervantes had to do on the place, since
the remnant of the Lazy S stock was safely rebranded and herded with
the Running Dog cattle.

Upon this particular morning, Miguel Cervantes was busily cutting
wires while his pony cropped the lush grass about the springs, when
he observed a single horseman approaching from the hills.  At the
same time his pony lifted its head and whinnied--in another direction
where nothing appeared.  Cervantes was puzzled, but, centering his
gaze on the rider, he recognized the figure of Jack Robinson.  He
ceased work, lolled against a fence post, and began to roll a
cigarette.  He looked up with a flashing smile as Robinson drew rein.

"_Buenos dias!_" cried the rider gayly.  "How goes it this morning,
Miguel?"

"Well, señor.  I am glad to see you again."

"The gladness is all mine," said Robinson cheerfully.  "If you knew
how close I came not to seeing you again you'd get me.  How is the
señorita?"

"Frying doughnuts."  Cervantes chuckled.  His keen eyes darted over
the other's figure.  "You slept out last night, yes?"

"C'rect, sure's my name's Jack Robinson!  Look rumpled, do I?  Oh,
I've been taking a squint at the country, Mig.  Need any help here?"

The other shrugged.  "No, thanks.  It would be better if you rode on
to the ranch."

Robinson gathered up his reins.  "Then, _hasta la vista_!  See you at
dinner time."

Cervantes gestured assent, and watched the slender figure go riding
off.  Once more his pony lifted its head, cocking its ears toward
another quarter.  Cervantes glanced at the hills, saw nothing, and
returned to his labor.

The figure of Robinson rode out of sight.  For a space Cervantes
worked on, rolling up the wire with painstaking care.  For the third
time his pony looked up, and flung a whinny of greeting into the
sunlight.  Cervantes halted, straightened up, and surveyed the empty
landscape with one hand over his eyes to shield them from the sun.

As he stood thus, motionless, a tiny puff of white spat out from a
hillside to his right; a second puff became visible to his left.  Two
rolling reports followed.  Cervantes, dropping his shielding hand,
stood for an instant and then quietly fell on his face.

Jack Robinson meantime rode up to the old adobe house beneath wide
cottonwoods that view the Shumway domain from its rounded knoll, and
dismounted.  The house had been built Mexican style, even to the
flat, stone-rolled adobe roof; it was cool and restful, with its
vines and flowers.

Since no one came forth to greet him, Robinson unsaddled, took his
horse to the corral to one side, and then tramped around the house to
the rear.  He turned the corner and paused.

Before him portly Señora Cervantes was pinning clothes to a line,
while from the near-by doorway of the kitchen issued a voice that
made Robinson turn a trifle red.

"I do hope he'll come soon!" was saying Estella Shumway.  "I don't
see why he went on to Harper's, when he must have known we were dying
to see him.  Well, that's the last of the batch; I'd better bring
them outside to cool."

The señora turned, beheld Robinson, and stood with open mouth.  He
made a gesture of silence, and stepped forward to the doorway.  In
this, a moment later, appeared a young lady who held a great platter
of new-sugared doughnuts in both arms.  As she came out, Robinson
stepped forward and took the platter from her.

Something happened swiftly.

"Oh!" cried the girl, surprise and indignation in her voice.  Her
freed hand slapped Robinson's cheek smartly; then she stared at him
with widening eyes and flushed cheeks.  "Oh!"  Her voice was suddenly
different, vibrant with eager welcome.  "Oh, it's you!  My goodness,
is that the way you show up?"

Holding the platter, Robinson surveyed her with twinkling eyes.

"That's sure the way to show up, isn't it?" he drawled.  "I was
afraid you might not give me the right kind of welcome, so I took it.
Sort of forgot what I look like, since you and Jake were down in
Pecos County last fall, haven't you?  Who'd you think was kissing
you, anyway?"

The girl's cheeks reddened again, then she broke into a glad laugh.

"If I'd known it was you," she cried, "why----"

Hastily Robinson set down the doughnuts and turned to the
doorway--but Estella had changed her position and now stood outside,
laughing at him.

"Too late!" she exclaimed, and then held out her hand.  "Goodness,
but I'm glad to see you.  I knew from what Miguel said that----"

"You see, Stella," broke in Robinson, "there was a lot o' trouble
down below.  The sheriff had been killed and Sam Fisher was filling
out the job; he'll prob'ly be elected anyhow.  So Sam being sheriff,
he couldn't get away, and sent me up instead."

Estella frowned sharply at him for a moment, studying his face.  She
was brown-haired, hazel-eyed, healthily brown of cheek and arm.
Robinson returned her gaze innocently.

"I always did admire the way those tendrils of brown hair sort of
break loose and curl down around your ears," he said, cocking his
head to one side and surveying her with critical stare.  "Yes, ma'am,
I always did, sure's my name's Jack Robinson!  I met Miguel back
yonder, where he's powerful busy with some wire, and he allowed you
would be glad to see me----"

"You met Miguel this morning?" repeated the girl.

"Yes.  Stopped for a chat, then came on.  I've been doing
considerable running around since yesterday."

Señora Cervantes came up, and Robinson was introduced.  Then,
grabbing doughnuts in each, hand, Robinson followed Stella around to
the wide veranda and with a sigh of relaxation settled down in a
comfortable chair at her side.

"Sam was right worried over not hearing from you," he observed.

"Not hearing?"  Estella regarded him with wide eyes.  "Why, I wrote
only two weeks ago--wrote a long letter and begged him to come up at
once if he could!  He knew all about the mortgage, and had promised
to try and sell the ranch if he could----"

Robinson's eyes narrowed.  "Who posted that letter for you?"

"I gave it to Mr. Buck to mail, as he was going to town."

"Oh!  Well, I guess it got lost in the shuffle somewhere," said
Robinson.  "Anyhow, Sam hasn't heard from you in a month.  Anyhow, he
sold the ranch."

"Sold it!  Sold this ranch?"  The girl stiffened.  "For how much?
Who to?"

Robinson shook his head.  "I dunno, ma'am.  Sam, he made me promise
not to say a word about it until he could get up here his ownself."

"Oh!"  A trace of anger flamed in the girl's eyes.  "I'd like to
shake you----"

"I'd sure like to have you," Robinson said with a grin.  "Go ahead,
ma'am!"

Instead, Stella settled back in her chair and regarded him narrowly.

"What kind of a game are you playing, anyway?" she demanded.

"None whatever.  Me, I'm a innercent pilgrim, a stranger, plumb
peaceable," and his grin was more exasperating than ever.  "As I
remember it, Sam Fisher sold an option on the place, and the feller
was coming up to look it over.  He had your power of attorney to
sell, but seemed like you had to consent to the deal."

"I had!" repeated the astonished girl.  "Why, nothing of the sort!  I
wrote Sam that he had full power----"

"Sure, sure, but this was different.  Seems like this feller wanted
you to go with the ranch," averred Robinson innocently.

Stella looked at him a moment, then sprang to her feet.  "What do you
mean?  How dare you!  Oh, I wish I knew when you were serious!  Who
bought the place?  Tell me!"

"Feller name of Robinson--Jack Robinson.  Got any objections?"

They looked at each other for half a minute, a slow tide of color
sweeping over the face of the girl.  As she was about to speak, there
came an interruption:

"Hello the house!  Anybody home?"

Both turned.  There, sitting upon his borrowed horse, was Mr. Murphy,
whose approach had been unobserved.  Robinson hastily dropped out of
sight, concluding that he had been unseen.

"Oh, Lord!" he murmured.  "Stella, bring in this gent quick; I'm
going to slaughter him.  Friend of mine, sure.  Bring him in and give
him a doughnut."

"Good morning," said the girl, somewhat perplexed at the whole
affair.  "Weren't you looking for me?"

"Lookin' for Miss Shumway, if you're her," returned Murphy.  He
dismounted and came forward toward the veranda.  "My name's Murphy,
ma'am.  I done bought a mortgage over to Laredo City las' week,
coverin' this place, and, bein', in the vicinity, thought I'd drop in
and ask about it comin' due the first of the month."

The girl's face whitened a trifle.  "The--mortgage?" she stammered.
"Why--why, I thought the bank held it----"

"Yes'm."  Murphy took a paper from his pocket as he mounted the
steps.  "But I done bought her in.  Maybe you'd like to look over
this----"

He broke off suddenly, for his eyes had fallen upon Robinson.  The
latter grinned at him cheerfully.

"Step right up, Mr. Murphy; step right up.  We're a whole lot glad to
see you.  Try a doughnut?  Finest you ever seen, I'll bet."

Murphy looked paralyzed, and in this case looks did not lie.




CHAPTER V

BUCK'S LUCKY DAY

Murphy really looked as though about to have a stroke.  His red face
purpled deeply, and his plastered right hand gave a slight, spasmodic
jerk.

"You want to watch that there hand real careful," said Robinson with
a solicitous air.  "Real careful!  Don't let it jerk thataway; it's a
right bad sign, Mr. Murphy!  Step up and have a seat, won't you?
Hello--you must ha' scratched that hand or hurt it somehow; all
plastered up, ain't it?"

"I--I didn't expect to be findin' you here," said Murphy, glaring
viciously.

"Don't doubt it," was the cheerful response, while Stella Shumway
looked from one to the other with suspicious scrutiny.  "That's my
specialty, bein' where I ain't expected.  But don't let me interrupt
your business talk none whatever.  I'll just set quiet and be a good
feller.  Mr. Murphy's an old friend of mine, Stella; known him since
yesterday afternoon.  Set and rest yourself, Murphy.  No ceremony
here."

Murphy compressed his thick lips, removed his hat, and finally shook
his head.

"I ain't settin', thanks," he returned, then faced the girl.  "You
don't mind if I look over the place a bit, ma'am?  Ain't aiming to
make myself obnoxious none, if----"

"Why, certainly," faltered Estella, handing back the paper she had
taken.  "Since you bought the mortgage, you have a right to look over
the property."

"Wait a minute," broke in Robinson.  "It's awful to have a tongue
like mine; just can't keep quiet two minutes.  You started in a while
ago, Murphy, to say something, then you switched off and started to
look over the place.  Let's finish and get cleaned up all fine.  What
was it you started to orate about the mortgage?"

Murphy gave him a savage glance.

"I was goin' to say," he said sullenly, "that we could make
arrangements about it's bein' paid off at the Pahrump bank."

"Oh!" Robinson stretched out comfortably.  His hand caressed the gun
at his belt, and Murphy watched that hand with attention.  "Oh!  But
s'pose it can't be paid off?  Was you about to offer to renew the
note?"

"I'm right sorry," and Murphy ignored his questioner, addressing
himself to Estella Shumway.  "Right sorry, ma'am, but I can't very
well renew.  Ye see----"

"Never mind goin' into the matter, feller," said Robinson.  His voice
had a sting to it.  "You turn around and address them remarks to me.
It looks mighty funny about you bein' so anxious to look around the
place, after you got a glimpse o' me settin' here.  What's your rush
to look at land, huh?  What you tryin' to kill time for?  Expectin'
to meet somebody else here?"

Murphy regarded him with veiled hatred.

"I dunno what you're talkin' about, Robinson," he said.  "I rode over
here square and open to transact business.  That business ain't with
you----"

"Oh, ain't it?" jeered Robinson.  "Look here, you!  I don't like your
looks, and I don't like the name you're sailin' under, savvy?  If I'd
known as much yesterday as I know now, I wouldn't ha' scratched that
hand of yours, not a bit of it!  I was a blamed fool.  Now, if you
expect me to turn my back on you any more, you got another guess
coming.  You're the one that's going to turn your back, and do it
pronto!"

"Are you threatening me?" demanded Murphy belligerently.

"Threaten you?  My gosh, no!"  Robinson chuckled.  "You ain't worth
it, you red hawg!  I want to see you ridin' away from here in a
hurry.  Oh, never you mind, Stella!  This gent isn't going to act as
mad as he looks.  That isn't his style.  Murphy, go grab for your gun
if you want; I'll give you till you grab it.  Hurry up!  Grab for it!"

Murphy looked down into those deadly blue eyes and made no move for
his gun.  His fat red features were perspiring a trifle.  Robinson
mocked at him.

"Oh, you ain't reachin' for it, huh?  S'pose ye'd like me to turn my
back, would ye?  Nope, not no more, feller.  Besides, they's ladies
present, and I sure hate to expose my back and start you to shootin'."

"Two men coming up the road," intervened Estella quickly.

At these words a flash crossed the face of Murphy--a flash of untold
relief.  Robinson did not miss the look.  Then he glanced at the
road, and saw the corduroy-clad figure of Buck, followed by another
rider.

"Don't mind if I smoke, Stella?" he drawled.  "Thanks.  Set down,
Murphy.  I'm real anxious to hear what Buck has to say to you."

Murphy did not sit down, but eyed the approaching riders uneasily.
Buck slid from his horse, looking visibly excited, and strode toward
the veranda.  He glanced at Robinson without surprise, then his gaze
fell on Murphy.  He doffed his hat to Estella.

"Morning, ma'am!  You sure look fresh as ever.  Got visitors, I see."

A smile on her lips, Estella stepped forward and shook hands.

"Just in time for lunch, Mr. Buck.  Yes, we have visitors.  My
friend, Mr. Robinson, from the south, and this is Mr. Murphy----"

Buck glanced at Robinson, then turned to Murphy suddenly.  A look of
recognition came into his eyes.  He was acting his part well.

"Murphy!" he said slowly.  "That ain't the name you went under when I
seen you before.  What you doin' here?"

At this challenge, the girl started in astonishment.  Robinson smiled
thinly.

"Me?" Murphy faced the rancher aggressively.  "None of your business,
is it?  But if you want to know, I done bought a mortgage on this
place, and I aim to foreclose if she ain't cleared off first of the
month."

"Oh, you do!"  Buck's hand flashed down and his gun looked at Mr.
Murphy.  "All I got to say to you is--git, and git quick!  The
mortgage'll be paid.  I'll lend Miss Shumway the money my ownself.
Git, you varmint!"

Murphy turned and strode down the steps, passed to his horse, and
rode away.

Buck gazed after him with narrowed eyes until he was well away.
Then, without a bit of warning, he whirled and threw down his gun at
Robinson.

"Hands up, you!  Quick!"

There was deadly intent in his voice.  Robinson, absolutely
surprised, put up his hands.  Buck leaned forward and jerked away his
gun.

"Here!  How dare you, Mr. Buck!" exclaimed Stella, darting forward.
"What do you mean by this----"

"Miss Stella," said Buck gravely, "I got mighty bad news for you.  Me
and two of my riders was comin' here this morning by way of the
spring.  We were up on that knoll behind it when we crossed the track
of a horseman, and a moment later we seen this gent," he motioned
toward Robinson with his ready gun, "ridin' up to the spring.
Cervantes was standin' there smokin' a cigarette.  What passed we
dunno.  All we heard was two shots, and then this gent rode away
quick.  When we got up, Cervantes was dead.  We come on here quick."

Horror filled the eyes of the girl, and a terrible grief.

"Dead--Miguel dead?"

"Shot twice, Miss Stella," answered the latter, regret in his tone.
"We seen the whole thing.  I left 'Chuck' Hansom to bring Miguel in,
then I come on.  Ye see, ma'am, we'd been lookin' for this gent since
yesterday.  Seems like he met my foreman, Matt Brady, and shot him
down, out o' pure cussedness."

"Don't forget Knute," intervened Robinson, smiling a thin smile.
"Don't forget him, Buck."

"Oh!"  Estella turned to the speaker swiftly.  "Tell me--tell him,
you must!  This isn't true!"

"Sho, of course it ain't true," said Robinson calmly.  "Sure's my
name's Jack Robinson, it ain't got a word of truth--except maybe that
poor Miguel's dead.  That's liable to be true."

The girl shrank away from him; then, with a burst of tears, ran from
the veranda.

Instantly the manner of Robinson changed.  He looked at Buck from
narrowed steely eyes that burned.

"Buck," he said softly, "I'm tellin' you here and now--you'd better
shoot while you got me, for you ain't goin' to have me long.  You'd
better shoot, Buck.  I'm warnin' you, it's your best chance.  After
this, you and me----"

"None of your big talk, Robinson," sneered the rancher.  "We have you
dead to rights, and we'll see that the law attends to you.  Hey,
there!  Come up and rope this gent!  We'll take him in to the sheriff
right off."

Buck's companion swung from the saddle, took his lariat, and came to
the veranda.  From inside the house came a shrill high scream of
grief; the señora had learned the news.  Then Estella appeared again,
and saw the puncher with the rope.

"Oh, you mustn't!" she cried out, running forward.  "He didn't do it;
he couldn't have done it, Mr. Buck!  Why----"

"Ma'am, we seen the whole thing," said Buck regretfully.  "And this
gent is mighty slick, but we'll turn him in to the law to be dealt
with.  That's all we aim to do."

"Oh, tell them, tell them!"  Estella turned her tear-stained eyes to
Robinson.  "You can make them believe when----"

"I'm afraid Mr. Buck is right stubborn and set in his ways," sighed
Robinson.  "Nope, they ain't a bit o' use in me spillin' any talk to
him, Stella!  Sure's my name's Jack Robinson, there ain't.  I met
Miguel on the way here, as I said, but----"

Buck nodded to his rider, who approached Robinson and deftly knotted
his wrists behind his back.

"Put him on my horse," said Buck quietly, "and take him into town.
Hand him over to Sheriff Tracy--and see that nothing happens to him.
Don't tell any one but the sheriff what's happened, savvy?  We don't
want to rouse up any necktie party in town.  This is a matter for the
law--open-and-shut case."

"Quite so," observed Robinson ironically.  "Quite so!  We'll get to
town all right, Buck--won't we, cowboy?  Lead on, and don't pull too
hard on that cord.  My wrists is real tender lately.  See you later,
Stella; don't you worry none whatever about this deal.  Trust Jake
Harper to see that the cards are dealt honest."

The girl stared after him, stricken in her grief.

Without attempt at protest, Robinson mounted into the saddle of Buck,
and allowed the puncher to tie his ankles beneath the horse.  Then
the puncher mounted, and started for town.  The two figures rode away
from the ranch, and lessened in the distance.

Buck, meantime, was speaking to Estella Shumway.

"This is a terrible thing, Stella," he said, his voice soft and
pleading.  "Poor Miguel and my boys has had some trouble, but it
wa'n't nothing to mention.  Gosh, this is pretty bad!  And then this
feller Murphy comin' along.

"Now look-a-here, Stella!  You got to let me handle things for you a
spell.  I'll get rid o' this cuss Murphy in a hurry.  Don't let the
money part of it bother you a mite.  I'll send in to town to-day and
git the preacher, and we'll attend to a real funeral for poor Miguel,
savvy?  There ain't nothin' I wouldn't do for you, li'l girl, and you
know it."

"Oh!"  The girl turned to him desperately.  "Are you sure--are you
sure about what you saw?  It isn't possible, I tell you!"

Her vehemence shook Buck despite himself.

"Why, Stella!  You ain't friends with this gunman Robinson?  He's a
stranger up here--sure, you don't know him?"

The girl shivered slightly and turned away.  She was silent for a
moment; then:

"No," she said.  "I never saw Robinson before to-day, Mr. Buck--only
he seemed such a nice man!  And he knew some friends of ours----"

A flash of relief crossed the features of Buck.

"Well, looks is deceivin'," he averred stoutly.  "Now, Stella, you
leave things to me.  Chuck will be in pretty quick with the body, and
I'll take care of it.  Poor Miguel!  This here news will be a mighty
big shock to everybody who knowed him.  Want me to send for Jake
Harper?  Him and me ain't overly friendly, but he's mighty true to
you, I guess.  We'll overlook our differences and 'tend to your
affairs."

"It's--it's good of you, Mr. Buck," and the girl glanced at him
quickly, then turned to the doorway.  "Yes, send for him, please.
You--you must excuse me now; I'll have to be with poor Tia Maria----"

She vanished into the house.

For a moment Buck stood motionless.  His gaze followed the tiny dots
that were the figures of his puncher and Robinson, and a smile curved
his wide lips.  Then he glanced down and picked up one of the
doughnuts that Robinson had dropped.  He regarded it, then bit
strongly into it.

"Gosh, these is sure fine doughnuts!" he observed.  "I'll sure be
playin' in luck when Stella comes to cook for me.  Lucky catchin'
Robinson thataway, too, y' understand.  And darned lucky Stella
didn't think to look if his gun'd been fired twice.  Plumb lucky!"




CHAPTER VI

PROOF

After leaving the Lazy S behind, Robinson rode in silence for some
time.  He was in the lead.  The puncher behind held the lariat which
bound Robinson to his horse.

"You got that gun of mine with you?" asked Robinson.  No answer from
behind.  "Well, I seen Buck hand her to you.  Be mighty careful with
her; she's got a special easy pull.  I'd be right sorry to have you
point her my way."

No answer.  The puncher was a sullen brute of a man.

"You fellers made one real mistake," went on Robinson, undaunted by
the silence, his voice cheerful as ever.  "You should ha' fixed that
gun o' mine.  Miguel was killed by two bullets, wasn't he?  But that
gun ain't been fired, cowboy.  You'd better set that right 'fore
turning me in to the sheriff.  Otherwise Tracy would have to fix the
gun his ownself, and he might forget it."

An oath from the rider behind apprised Robinson that his words had
taken full effect.  He grinned slightly.  A moment later his horse
started as a gun was fired in the air.  Looking over his shoulder,
Robinson saw the puncher in the act of firing the second time.

"Two shots is plenty," he observed.  "That's real friendly of you,
cowboy.  I'd hate to spoil everything by not havin' fired that there
weapon."

The sullen rider gave him a malevolent glance and motioned ahead.
Robinson turned and made no further overtures.

They jogged on in silence, the hoofs raising a slow cloud of dust
that followed and drifted over them with the breeze of noonday.  For
half an hour neither man spoke a word, and then Robinson again
ventured an effort:

"You three gents must ha' been planted when I rode by and spoke with
Cervantes.  Ain't that the way of it now?"

No response at all.  Robinson chuckled.

"I guess that's it, feller.  Buck seen me, and got a great idea.
Looks like he was dead right about it, too.  Only thing that worries
me is this: Who fired the two shots?  Each o' these hosses has a
rifle, but they was a third puncher along with you.  However, that
don't matter right now.  The three of you was planted, seen me, and
let me go past.  That was actin' real clever toward me, as they say
down south.  Ever been down thataway, feller?  You come down some day
and get you a job on the SF Ranch below Pecos City.  I'll help you
get it any old time.  Sam Fisher owns her.  He's a smart young
feller, they do say, only he don't justify his reputation much.
Least, that's what Jake Harper says."

"Hold your jaw!" came the savage command from behind.

Robinson glanced over his shoulder and beheld another cloud of dust
far behind them.  His captor jerked on the lariat, and continued:

"Robinson, you start any talkin' and you'll never reach town alive.
I means it.  When that gent comes up, if he ain't Buck you lay low."

"Conceded," returned Robinson.  "I'll not say a word, providin' you
tell me where Murphy went to."

"What you so dummed curious about Murphy for?"

"Born that way and can't help it.  Tell me, and I won't say a word."

"Well, Murphy he went to town, I guess.  Satisfied?"

"Plenty."  Robinson looked straight ahead at the road, and grinned to
himself.

Behind the two the cloud of dust moved rapidly closer.  The Running
Dog rider turned often in his saddle with uneasy scrutiny, but to
make out the figure of the rider was impossible, for the breeze was
stiffly behind them and blew the dust ahead.

Thus it was not until the drum of hoofs behind was distinctly audible
that Robinson heard a low oath issue from his captor.

"It's that fool Arnold from the Circle Bar!  You, Robinson, keep your
trap shut!"

Robinson grinned and made no response.  But a moment later he looked
over his shoulder, and remained looking.

Arnold was spurring his cayuse after the pair.  Now he sent a hoarse
yell ahead--a yell which caused the Running Dog man to jerk up his
mount and turn, hand on gun.

"Put 'em up!" yelled Arnold again.

"Take it, if ye want it," growled the puncher, and drew.

Before his gun spoke, Steve Arnold fired--and fired again.  Then
Arnold came riding up to the plunging horse and fallen man, swearing
huge oaths as he did so; the vivid flame of hatred in his face was
terrible to see.

"Steve, I'm right s'prised in you," said Robinson calmly.  Arnold
whirled on him.

"You didn't see it!" he cried, his voice cracking.  "You didn't see
it--I did!  This here guy was one of the two--him and Buck done it.
They shot down Miguel, murdered him, never said a word, jest let
drive from the brush!  By gosh, it was all I could do not to let
drive on 'em--not a mite of warning, but two shots!"

The face of Robinson was grave, sternly set, ten years older.

"Was it as bad as that?" he queried.  "Turn me loose, Steve!"

Arnold came up and fumbled at the knots.  Tears of excitement were on
his dusty cheeks.

"The dirty skunks!" he cried.  "It was low down, Red--the worst I
ever dreamed of.  This guy was one of the two.  But I give him
warning; you heard me?  I warned him 'fore I shot him down."

"You done so, Steve," affirmed Robinson, rubbing his freed wrists.
"What happened after they shot Cervantes?"

"They left Chuck Hansom with him, and follered you.  I snuck past
Chuck and follered them, lay up and circled around the Lazy S house.
Seen Murphy go, then seen you put into the saddle.  After that I
follered along until I heard the two shots, and that was all."

Robinson reached for the rifle that was booted at the saddle before
him.

"This is Buck's horse, Steve," he said gravely.  "And Buck's rifle.
Now, lookin' down the barrel, you'll agree with me that she's been
fired real lately--and there's a trace o' fumes to prove it.  That's
proof aplenty for Buck.  Let's look at this gent's rifle."

The rifle from the other saddle had also been fired recently.
Robinson looked down at the dead man and shook his head sadly.

"You fellows," he observed, "have been sowing the wind up in this
county--and now you're going to reap the whirlwind.  You'll reap it
good and plenty, and she'll strike sudden; she always does.  Steve!
Can you swear to it that Buck fired one of the shots?"

"I seen him rise up with his gun a-smokin'," averred Steve Arnold.

"Then let's you and me lay off of Buck entirely." Robinson smiled
harshly at the dead man.  "We'll get him when the time comes--and let
the law deal with him."

"Law?"  Arnold swore scornfully.  "Lot o' law in this county!  You'd
never get Tracy to arrest Buck even!"

Robinson regarded him a moment, the blue eyes keen and hard.

"C'rect the first shot, sure's my name's Jack Robinson!  But I don't
aim to have Tracy do any arrestin'.  The main thing right now is that
Buck is back at the Lazy S fillin' Stella full o' fancy lies, and she
thinkin' I'm in jail for the murder of poor Cervantes."

"Oh!  So that's why they had you tied up?" queried Steve Arnold.

"Somethin' like that."  Robinson smiled.  "Steve, can I trust you to
turn in back there and say nothin'--keep your head level--just be
nice and polite to Buck and his man Chuck Hansom?  Can ye do it,
cowboy?"

"Can if I got to.  Why?"

"Then go do it, and stick around till you gets a chance to wise up
Stella to the facts of the case.  Take Buck's rifle; we may need a
real gun 'fore we get through.  I'll ride this feller's hoss and take
his Winchester.  Buck's hoss we'll send home by his ownself."

Suiting action to words, Robinson took the bridle of the dead man's
mount, then with a slap and a wave of his hat sent Buck's beast
careering down the road.  Arnold sat looking down at him darkly.

"Where you goin', Red?"

Robinson's old quizzical smile broke forth.  "Me?  I got to get to
town in time to call for some mail----"

"To town, ye durned fool!  Ridin' a Runnin' Dog cayuse?  Here, you
take this hoss o' mine and I'll take--"

"And give our game away to Buck?  Not on your young life, cowboy!  I
want Mr. Buck to think I'm safe behind the bars--until he gets home
and finds his own hoss, anyhow.  Nope, you amble along and don't
waste worry over me.  Your job is to take the worry off Stella's
mind, savvy?"

"You've got mighty well acquainted, Red.  Callin' her Stella, huh?"

"That's my specialty."  With a laugh, Robinson was in the saddle and
turning his horse toward town.  "See you later.  If you take a
notion, I'll prob'ly be in town until about eight o'clock to-night.
And mind, you leave Buck be!  He'll hang for that murder!"

With this he put spurs to his cayuse and careered down the road in a
cloud of dust.  Steve Arnold looked after him, scowled down at the
dead man, then reined about and started on the back trail.  He was
quivering, tremulous with a stern excitement.

"My first man!"  He looked back at the motionless figure, then
straightened in the saddle.  "Well, I s'pose it had to come some
time--and I'm glad I paid out the cuss for what he done at the
spring.  Question is, can I git to town 'fore eight o'clock to-night?
Red, he's sure aimin' to raise Cain with somebody there."

When at length he dismounted at the Lazy S, he was met by Buck and
Chuck Hansom, the latter a cheerful scoundrel who sported an Indian
beadwork vest and was credited with an aptitude for any deviltry.

"Howdy, Steve!" greeted Buck.  "Jest come from town?  Meet anybody?"

"Uh-huh."  Arnold busied himself unsaddling.  "Done heard the news.
Met that hombre of yourn with his pris'ner in tow.  Brought in
Cervantes, have you?"

Buck nodded gravely.  "Where's Jake Harper, d'you know?"

"Home, I reckon.  His rheumatiz was right bad this mornin'," said
Arnold coolly.  "Miss Stella inside?  I got a letter for her."

"I'll take it in," proffered Jake.  "She's right cut up about Miguel.
I don't guess you'd better bother her now, Steve----"

Arnold's hand fell to his gun.  So deadly was his face in that moment
that Buck instinctively took a step backward.

"I'm carryin' my own mail," said Arnold.  "You fellers object?"

"Of course not," said Buck hastily.  "What ye tryin' to do--stir up
trouble a time like this?  Miss Stella wants to git Jake here.  Goin'
over to the ranch real soon?"

"I don't aim to."  Arnold gave him look for look.  "If she's done
asked you to fetch Jake, you fetch him.  I got business of my own; I
ain't ridin' for Jake no more."

"You ain't!" exclaimed Buck, staring.  "Listen!  I got room for
you----"

"Not for me, you ain't!" and with a slow laugh Steve Arnold went into
the house.

The other two looked after him, then glanced at each other.  Chuck
Hansom uttered a chuckle, and touched Buck's arm.

"I guess you 'n' me had better go find Jake ourselves, Buck.  What
say?"

Buck nodded.  His work here was done for the moment.  He was well
satisfied with it.




CHAPTER VII

MASKS OFF

It was late afternoon when Jack Robinson rode into the town of
Pahrump, county seat of the county of the same name.  The town was
deserted apparently; somnolent and sleepy.  The afternoon stage was
not yet in with the mail.  The courthouse square, with its long
hitching rail, seemed abandoned to flies and sunlight.  Even the jail
and sheriff's office looked desolate; across the street from this
last, Mike's Place showed not a sign of life.

Robinson went to the hotel and turned his horse into the corral
there, leaving his saddle and bridle in the hotel office for
safe-keeping.  He then made his way to Main Street and sought the
telegraph office.  There was no line in Pahrump, but the telephone
exchange handled messages.  At the exchange, Robinson smiled at the
young woman in charge.

"I left a message here yesterday, ma'am, askin' you to hold up any
answer.  Name of Fisher."

Without comment the young woman handed him a message.  Robinson
pocketed it, returned to the street, glanced at the message, and
chuckled.

"What I need is grub, a bath, and a shave," he reflected.  "Fresh
shirt wouldn't hurt anything, not to mention a clean handkerchief.
Grub can come last."

The stage and express office, an integral unit with the Johnson
Merchandise Company, lay across the street.  Robinson betook himself
thither and confronted a listless clerk.

"What's all the excitement about in town?" he demanded.  The clerk
saw no humor in the question, but answered it seriously:

"Two men shot up yesterday; sheriff's gone out with a posse.  Dunno
why."

"I don't know why, either," said Robinson cheerfully.  "You ought to
have a pair of saddlebags sent up by express from Pecos City.  Name
of Fisher."

"Come in last night," was the response.

The saddlebags over his arm, Robinson went to the barber shop.  There
he obtained a shave, followed by a bath, and from the saddlebags he
spruced up with a clean shirt and handkerchief--also a second gun.

His pilgrimage now took him to the nearest and only restaurant, where
he put away a huge order of ham and eggs, with other things.  This
done, he dropped his saddlebags at the hotel, loosened his belt,
bought a cigar, and sauntered down the street again.  Thus far he had
seen no signs of Mr. Murphy, and he rightly concluded that the
gentleman was sequestered in or about Mike's Place.

These errands had taken up considerable time.  The stage was nearly
due, and the town showed some symptoms of animation.  Horses fringed
the long hitching rail in the square.  A number of loungers about the
sheriff's office showed that the posse had returned.  Unhurried,
Robinson sauntered to the post office and presented a smiling face at
the window.

"Mail for Fisher, please," he requested.

The postmaster fished several long envelopes from a box, glanced at
them, then gave Robinson a hard look.

"Nothin' fer you, I guess."

"Your mistake, mister," and Robinson smiled.  "Those letters are for
me, I believe."

"These here is for Sheriff Sam Fisher o' Pecos County."

Robinson drew a flat metal object from his pocket and laid it on the
shelf.

"Does that satisfy you?  If not, I'll come around and get my own
mail."

The postmaster glanced at the sheriff's badge, silently shoved out
the letters, and stared at Robinson as that young man departed.

Without looking at his mail, Robinson took his easy way to the
sheriff's office.  He nodded to the loungers outside, and passed in.
At the door which bore the sheriff's name he paused.  Turning the
handle, he walked in.

Sheriff Tracy was seated at a desk, alone in the room.  He looked up,
saw who his visitor was, and gasped.  Then his hand slid across the
desk.

"Don't!" said Robinson, and Tracy looked into a gun.  "Set back; I
dropped in for a quiet talk.  Also, I aim to use your office a spell."

"You impudent scoundrel!" gasped the sheriff.  "Look here!  What
d'you know about that shooting on the north road yesterday?"

"Know all about it," responded Robinson coolly, closing the door and
drawing up a chair opposite the sheriff.  He sat down and laid the
gun before him.  "In fact, I done it.  Now, set still and don't call
in anybody just yet.  We got to have a talk.  First, I want to look
at this here mail, if you don't object."

He put the letters on the desk and spread them out.  Tracy's glance
fell to them.  A start of surprise, and his gaze returned to
Robinson's face.

"Whose mail you got there, Robinson?"

"My own."  Robinson smiled thinly, knowing that Tracy had read the
name on that mail.

There was a moment of silence.  Tracy surveyed his cool visitor with
frightful uneasiness, licked his lips, tugged at his mustache.  Then:

"Well, what you want here?"

"Several things, sheriff.  I'll be real busy to-morrow, so I thought
we'd better get all fixed up to-day.  Got to go out to the Lazy S
to-night with the preacher and attend to the funerals to-morrow."

"Funerals?  At the Lazy S?  What in time d'you mean?"

"Shootin'; somebody murdered Miguel Cervantes this mornin'.  Shot him
twice in the back."

The sheriff leaped from his chair.  Robinson's hand went to his gun,
and Tracy sat down again, breathing hard.

"Who done it?"

"Now, sheriff, don't go to askin' me unpleasant questions.  One of
the gents that done it is real dead.  The other gent is going over
the road for it--in my care."

Tracy bristled.

"You may be Sam Fisher and you may not," he said aggressively, "but
you ain't walkin' into my county and givin' no orders, stranger.
That's plumb final.  You got no authority here; not a mite."

"I know it," said Robinson sweetly.  "But I aim to get that authority
real sudden.  Now don't go to causing any trouble, Sheriff Tracy.  In
about ten minutes from now you got to saddle up and take quite a
journey, and I'd hate to make you take a longer journey than is
necessary."

"Saddle up!  Me?" queried Tracy, red-faced.

"Yep.  First thing, you look over this here telegram.  It's about a
gent named Murphy, which same is sojournin' in our midst.  Since
somebody wants him bad enough to offer three hundred dollars for him,
you'd ought to be interested in picking up the money."

He laid his telegram on the desk.  Tracy read it.  His face was a
study in mingled emotions.  Finally he looked up at Fisher with a
complete change of front.

"I guess you're Sam Fisher, all right," he observed.  "They say he's
got the devil's own nerve, and you sure show it.  But you're making a
terrible mistake butting into things like this, Fisher.  You don't
know this here county----"

"Here's my badge for proof, and my mail," said Robinson.  "I'm Sam
Fisher--fact is, I never said right out that I was Robinson.  Folks
just took that for granted.  You and the old gang are plumb out of
luck, Tracy.  I got no hard feelings against you, and I'm going to
give you the chance to slide out of town, avoid trouble, and pick up
three hundred iron men.  In other words, take Mr. Murphy to the
railroad and go away with him.  By the time you get back the trouble
will be all over and you'll have a clean slate."

Tracy, breathing hard, surveyed his visitor with anxious eyes.

"Don't get hasty now," warned Robinson--or, to use his real name, Sam
Fisher.  "And don't get to thinking about Templeton Buck and how much
power he has.  He ain't going to have much left when I get through
with him, Tracy.  I s'pose he's given out orders that poor Jack
Robinson has got to be eliminated.  Fact is, he thought he had me
eliminated a few hours ago.  That's all right; we'll leave Jack
Robinson out of it.  Sam Fisher has drawn cards in this game, and
he's going to stick for the pot."

"Why don't you take Murphy, if you want him, and go?" demanded the
sheriff.

"I don't want him.  Three hundred bones means nothin' in my young
life.  Also, and moreover, I don't aim to go in that direction."
Fisher's smile was cherubic.  "You are gettin' off mighty easy,
Tracy.  All you got to do is to swear me in as a deputy and turn over
the jail keys to me, then start travelin' with Murphy.  I'll even go
so far as to help you arrest him."

Tracy reddened again.

"Leave you here?" he said.  "Not much!  I ain't going to do no such
thing----"

"I said not to get hasty, didn't I?"  Fisher's eyes hardened into
blue steel.

"You can't run no riffle on me, Fisher!" blustered Tracy.  "If I
don't do it, then what?"

Fisher surveyed him a moment with that bitterly cold gaze:

"If you don't do it," he returned slowly, "then you got to make a
heap big war talk, and do it sudden.  Balance her up now, and make
your play.  I'm talkin' turkey."

In those tense features Tracy read the truth--this man was in to play
the limit.  And Tracy dared not back his hand; he could not trust his
own cards.  There was too much he did not know.  He had been unable
to find Buck that afternoon, and he was facing this crisis on his own
backbone--which did not amount to much.

He had heard of Sam Fisher often and often.  The sheriff of Pecos had
a reputation, and stood behind it hard.  Tracy could not tell just
what this man would dare do, and he did not care to take chances on
finding out.

On the other hand, he was offered a trip with a prisoner which would
net him three hundred dollars reward money.  He would be safely away
while Fisher was playing his game.  It would be certainly all right
to leave Fisher, the sheriff of the next county, in charge of Pahrump
while he was gone.  And if Fisher got killed, what loss?  None.  If
he did not get killed, he was apt to kill off several people who were
behind Tracy.  That would be no great loss either.

A grim smile curved the lips of Tracy.

"Sam, your arguments are powerful good," he said.  "There's a couple
o' deputies outside.  If you want to have the ceremony over right
away----"

Fisher nodded, rose, and went to the door.

"Hey, fellers!" he called to the group outside.  "Come inside;
sheriff wants you."

Five men trooped in, eyeing Fisher with uneasy glances.  Sheriff
Tracy, having made his decision, lost no time in putting the job
through.

"This here," he said, motioning to his visitor, "is Sam Fisher,
sheriff o' Pecos County.  I'm about to swear him in as deputy and
leave him in charge of things here.  Fisher, you want these deputies
to work with you?"

Sam Fisher eyed the group and smiled.

"Nope, I'm satisfied to play a lone hand, Tracy.  Much obliged for
the offer."

"Very well.  You boys can bear witness to this here affair, then
you're free.  Hold up your hand, Fisher--"

Sam Fisher was duly sworn as deputy sheriff, and Tracy handed him a
badge.  Fisher put it in his pocket with a grin.  The startled,
staring men behind him were dumfounded.  Tracy then shoved over the
jail keys.

"They's four brand-new cells," he said, "just installed, all the
latest fittin's.  The others ain't worth much 'cept for looks.  Four
will be plenty, I guess?"

"One," said Fisher significantly, "is all I figger on using.  I'd
hate to cause the county a lot of expense, Tracy, when you're
treatin' me so wide and handsome."

"You want to move into the office here while I'm gone?"

"Nope, thanks.  I'll just lock her up; I expect to be plumb busy for
a few days.  Now what say to you and me going after that bad guy?  I
reckon we'll find him down to Mike's Place.  Boys," and he turned to
the ex-deputies, "Sheriff Tracy has discovered that there's a feller
here badly wanted for a holdup and murder--and he aims to light out
with him right off.  That is, providin' we gather him in without any
gunplay, which we hope to do.  You might spread the news, so folks
won't think it funny that Tracy is out o' town."

"What about that killin' up on the north road?" asked somebody.
"Matt Brady?"

Fisher looked at the speaker.

"Oh, him?" he asked in surprise.  "Why, I done that myself.  No
objections?"

"Gosh, no!" was the response, hastily rendered.

Sam Fisher smiled grimly as he left the office with Tracy at his
elbow.

"Any of the Running Dog outfit in town?" he asked when they were
crossing the street.

"Not that I know of," said Tracy, jingling the handcuffs in his
pocket.  "But if I was you, Fisher, I'd sort of keep my eye skinned
for Buck."

"Thanks."  Fisher chuckled.  "That's the best little thing to do,
Tracy.  Well, here goes for the big show!  Bet you a dollar we don't
even have a rumpus."

He pushed open the swinging doors of Mike's Place.




CHAPTER VIII

EXIT MR. P. BRADY

The saloon was deserted, except for Galway Mike and Mr. Murphy, who
were closely engaged in conversation across the bar.  In another half
hour the place would be rushed; the stage would be in, and the usual
evening's business would be opened up.

Sam Fisher wasted no time on preliminaries.  When he stepped inside
the place it was with a drawn gun.

"Hands up, gents!" he said quietly.  "Move quick, Mike!"

Two pairs of hands were swiftly elevated.  Murphy saw in the bar
mirror who had come in, and he stood petrified.  Mike grimaced
angrily.

"This ain't a holdup, is it?" he uttered.  "Sure an all----"

"Nope, and you aren't in it, Mike," responded Fisher.  "So long as
you keep out of it, you're not in it; get the idea?  All right.
Better iron this gent, sheriff."

Tracy appeared, to the amazement of Mike.  He produced handcuffs and
stepped forward.  From Murphy broke a string of oaths.

"Shut up!" ordered Fisher.  "One more word out of you, Pincher Brady,
and I'll drill your hand--should ha' done it yesterday.  You're going
to the capital for robbery and murder.  Guess I'll take a look at his
pockets, Tracy, if you don't mind."

Gyved and backed against the bar by Tracy, the prisoner was helpless.
Sam Fisher stepped forward, removed his gun, and then swiftly
searched him.  He took from Murphy's breast pocket a number of
papers, and hurriedly glanced over them.

"Most of these have bearings on my case, Tracy," he announced.
"You'll have no objections if I take charge of 'em?"

"None whatever, Fisher," said the sheriff amiably.

At this response Murphy gave a violent start.  Galway Mike, behind
the bar, opened his mouth and started with a drooping jaw.

"Fisher!" stammered Murphy.  "Who you callin' Fisher, sheriff?  This
here gent----"

"Is the sheriff o' Pecos County," said Sheriff Tracy.  "And he's
takin' my place here for a few days, gents.  Now, Brady, march along!"

"I'll run along and see you off," said Sam Fisher languidly.

Tracy grinned.  He was beginning to feel that he had chosen the wiser
way out of a very bad dilemma, and was fully as anxious to depart
from Pahrump as Sam Fisher was to have him gone.  He had nothing to
gain by staying, and much to lose.

"If I'd knowed you was Sam Fisher," said Murphy ruefully as they went
out, "I wouldn't have monkeyed with you no ways."

"But you didn't, and you did," returned Fisher cheerfully.  "And now
you're in the soup, Pincher.  But cheer up; you'll meet some friends
of yours before long, as soon as I get time to round 'em up and send
'em along.  Where are your hosses, Tracy?"

"I got a couple in the hotel corral."

Sight of the two men with their obvious prisoner quickly assembled a
small crowd, which drifted along to the hotel.  On the porch Sam
Fisher seated Mr. Murphy in a chair and stood guard over him while
Tracy went for the horses.  The crowd eyed the two men and offered
many comments and questions, to which Sam Fisher only replied with a
smile.  News of his identity having been spread by the ex-deputies of
the posse, he was at length confronted by a direct question.

"Are you Fisher o' Pecos County?" demanded one of the crowd about the
porch.

"C'rect the first shot, pardner," responded Sam Fisher.

"What ye doin' here?"

"Workin'," was the laconic retort.  "Any objections?"

"You wait till Buck hears about this!" came in quick response.  "Him
and the Runnin' Dawg will certainly take down your hide.  Hey,
fellers!  Let's run this Pecos sheriff out o' town!  We don't want
him here!"

There was a general, although by no means hearty, assent to the
proposal.  At this moment Tracy rode up with a spare horse.  He
grinned at Fisher and addressed the crowd.

"Gents, I've swore in Sheriff Fisher as special deputy and am leavin'
him in charge of things here.  Adios!  Gimme the prisoner, Sam."

Fisher led the wilted Mr. Murphy to the waiting horse and assisted
him into the saddle rather energetically.  He waved the pair an
ironic farewell.

"Hearty travelin' to you gents!  See you later, Tracy."

The two rode down the street.  Sam Fisher turned to the crowd
surrounding him, and all the laughing geniality had fled out of his
face.

"Boys," he said gravely, "I don't blame you for not wanting strangers
butting into your affairs.  I'm not going to do it for long--but
while I'm doing it I aim to do it thorough and proper.  Miguel
Cervantes was murdered this morning; shot from ambush.  I'm going to
get the man who did it, and I'm going to send him to the pen.  That's
all.  Now will some gent kindly direct me to where the nearest or
next preacher resides?"

Dumfounded by this information, the crowd split before him.  Somebody
volunteered the desired direction, and Sam Fisher strode off to
arrange for the funeral at the Lazy S on the following day, also for
a coroner's jury.  The latter gave him some trouble, but mention of
his name and present position proved sufficient to obtain what he
desired.  Also, tale of the murder of Cervantes and the manner
thereof was a tremendous shock.  Sam Fisher was careful to make no
mention of the murder, and merely shook his head to all queries.

It was seven o'clock that evening when Chuck Hansom, rider for the
Running Dog, came into town from the north alone.  Before he had
ridden a block he was hailed eagerly and brought to a halt, where a
small crowd gave him the astounding information about Sam Fisher.
Now Chuck was a quick-witted rascal.  He readily saw the general
sentiment of puzzled wonder and resentment against Fisher's intrusion
into Pahrump, and inside of two minutes he took prompt advantage of
it.

"Listen here!" he cried out hotly.  "This here guy ain't Sam Fisher
at all.  He's a feller named Robinson, pretending to be Fisher.  He's
the guy that murdered Mig Cervantes.  Me and Buck seen him do
it--seen him!  You boys go git your guns and we'll 'tend to him."

There was a howl as his words became understood.

Meantime, from the south, two other men came riding into town on
jaded, staggering beasts.  They were two Running Dog riders who had
been absent from the community for some weeks; so unkempt, so dust
covered and weary were they that they arrived at Mike's Place without
recognition.

Sliding out of the saddle with groans of relief, they staggered into
Mike's Place, which was comfortably crowded.  They were too fearfully
tired with hard riding to note the startled silence which fell on the
crowd as they were recognized.

"Liquor, Mike!" croaked the foremost, wiping his dust-rimmed eyes.
"A drink!  Buck been in town to-day?"

Galway Mike set out a bottle and made a grimace, but neither man
noticed it.  Both seized for the bottle at once, pouring drinks with
shaking hands.

"Nope," said Mike at last.  "Ain't been in."

"Gosh, that feels good goin' down!" rejoined the foremost man.  "Say,
you got to get word out to Buck to-night; we can't ride another mile.
Done killed two hosses on the way up.  Tell Buck we done lost our
man----"

At length the dead stillness of the place struck home.  The two
riders glanced at each other, then turned to survey the crowd.
Despite the fact that the general sympathy was with them, nobody
could keep back a grin at their perturbed wonder.  Then, from the end
of the bar, a voice spoke up--a drawling, whimsical voice:

"You ain't lost him, cowboy.  You just follered him.  Ain't it the
truth?"

There, thumbs in his vest and leaning back in his chair, was Fisher.
The two stared at him, petrified.  Fisher sat at a table just beyond
the lower end of the bar, where he was practically hidden from view
of any one at the door, yet had a clear field of vision.

"Sheriff Fisher!" exclaimed the two astounded riders in unison, as
though they were staring at a ghost.

There was dead silence for a moment.

Every one in the room sensed the peculiar tenseness of that moment--a
moment of crisis, of taut nerves, of impending disaster, as the two
riders stared at Sam Fisher and he smiled back at them.  Perhaps he
saw how their fingers stiffened, yet he did not move.  If he did not
see it, Galway Mike did.  Mike's hand fell, inch by inch, below the
edge of the bar on which he leaned.

These were the two men who had been keeping watch on Fisher down in
Pecos City.  They knew without telling that the presence of Sam
Fisher here meant danger to the Running Dog.  Perhaps they had been
too closely in touch with Fisher down below to retain much awe of
him, and, besides, they were dead tired, nerves on edge, and reckless.

As with one accord they reached for their guns.

Sam Fisher came to his feet, gun in hand.  He had no intention of
shooting unless so compelled, but he was watching the two riders and
not Mike.

Before any shot sounded Mike's hand had completed its motion--a
swift, underhand fling of deadly accuracy that sent his bung-starter
down behind the bar unseen.  It crashed into Fisher's forehead and
sent him down like a felled steer.

Two shots came.  That bung-starter saved Fisher's life, for it
dropped him beneath the bullets.  He lay quiet, momentarily stunned.
In another five seconds the crowd had fallen upon him; he was trussed
hand and food and bound in a chair.

Amid the pandemonium that ensued, with wild yells for ropes and much
loud cursing, Galway Mike mounted the bar with a gun in each fist,
fired into the ceiling, and evoked comparative silence.

"Byes, this gent is my meat!" he roared.  "'Twas me dropped him, and
it's me that'll have the say, moind that!  There'll be no lynchin'
party yet a while.  Two of yez carry him into the storeroom behint
and lave him rest a bit.  We'll be talkin' this over, and maybe Buck
will be in town to-night."

The mention of Buck's name carried weight.  Besides, Sam Fisher had
opened his eyes and was looking around.  It was one thing to tie up a
man--it was another thing to murder a bound and helpless prisoner.
The crowd hesitated.

"Take him into the back room wid ye now," repeated Mike, flourishing
his guns.  The gaze of Sam Fisher dwelt upon him for a moment.

"Mike," said the prisoner calmly, "you're interfering with justice,
and you know it.  Inside of an hour I'll get you for this.  Be ready."

That was all.  The brutal features of Galway Mike reddened, then
turned deathly pale under the intent gaze of Fisher.  One of his
hands jerked up; for an instant it looked as though he would shoot
the bound man.  Perhaps he would have done so but for the crowd.
Instead, he motioned to the back room with his weapon, and jumped
down from the bar.

Two men picked up Sam Fisher, still bound to his chair, and carried
him into the storeroom behind the main room of the saloon.  It was a
good-sized room, stacked with barrels and cases of liquor, with a
single window.  A lantern, hung to a peg, illumined the place dimly.
Stowing the prisoner here, the men closed the door again and joined
the clamorous throng around the bar.

The two arrivals from the south were hurriedly apprised of
events--the departure of Sheriff Tracy, the killing of Matt Brady and
'Lias Knute, the rumored murder of Miguel Cervantes.  In the midst
Steve Arnold pushed open the doors and entered.  At sight of him
everyone pressed forward eagerly.

"Here's Arnold of the Lazy S now!  Hey, Steve, is it true Cervantes
was shot to-day?"

Arnold swept the place with his eyes, nodding curtly.  He saw nothing
of Robinson.

"Yes," he said.  "Not shot--murdered."

"Who done it?" went up a mad clamor of voices.  "How?  Where?"

"Ain't for me to say," returned Arnold.

His attitude would have provoked instant hostility had not two men
rushed into the saloon at this moment with a loud shout.

"Hey!  Chuck Hansom of the Runnin' Dawg is comin' a-smokin' with a
crowd; he says this feller ain't Fisher at all; says he's a feller
named Robinson; murdered Cervantes!  Chuck says him an' Buck seen it
done----"

Uproar filled the place, and mad confusion.  For two minutes
pandemonium reigned supreme.  Then somebody thought of appealing to
Steve Arnold to confirm the tidings, but when things quieted down
Arnold proved to have vanished.

Hot upon the heels of this arrived Chuck Hansom and a yelling crowd.
Standing in the entrance, Chuck showed a gun in each hand.

"Where's the feller calls himself Sam Fisher?  I'm lookin' for him."

Finding no prey awaiting him, Chuck strode forward, greeted his two
brethren, and found himself confronted by Galway Mike, who held a
sawed-off shotgun across the bar.

"Far enough, Chuck!  We got Fisher in the back room, tied up.  Hold
on, you byes in the doorway!  L'ave us be, will ye?"

Silence was obtained, leaving the center of the floor to Mike, Chuck
Hansom, and the two Running Dog riders.

"Now, me lad," pursued Mike over his shotgun, "what's this tale ye
been tellin'?"

"It was Robinson murdered Cervantes, and we're aiming to 'tend to
him," returned Chuck.  "He ain't Sam Fisher at all, ye numskull
Irisher!  His name is Robinson----"

"It ain't!" spoke up one of the two returned men.  "He's Sam Fisher,
all right.  Ain't we been follerin' him for two weeks?  You're
locoed, Chuck!"

This staggered Chuck for a moment, then he recovered.

"You durned fools!" he cried wrathfully.  "Let him be Fisher, for all
I care.  Anyhow, we seen him shoot down Miguel Cervantes.  Shot him
in the back, I'm tellin' ye.  You, Mike!  Lay down that gun!"

From behind Hansom went up a low, surging growl.  Every man there saw
red at the tale he heard; the story of Miguel Cervantes shot in the
back.  For only an instant did Galway Mike hesitate; then his shotgun
fell.

"You win, byes," he cried.  "If he done that, go git him and have a
party!"

There was a swelling roar as the crowd surged to the doorway of the
storeroom.




CHAPTER IX

FISHER RIDES NORTH

Mike's Place was lighted into the semblance of day by two huge
acetylene lamps in the center of the ceiling.

As the foremost of the crowd entered the storeroom there came to the
others a howl of baffled rage.  The entire rear of the long room was
a surging mass of men, all fighting to be first.  The front of the
place was quite deserted, except for the figure of Mike, who stood
behind the bar, hand still on his shotgun.

About the rear doorway centered a wild struggle.  Nobody knew just
what was taking place until Chuck Hansom leaped to a chair and
dominated the mob.

"He's gone!" roared the cowboy with the gay beaded vest.  "Gone!
Somebody's cut him loose.  Got out the windy----"

"C'rect the first shot, Chuck," drawled a quiet voice from the front.

Every man there turned, to behold Steve Arnold in the doorway, a gun
in each hand.  To one side of the swinging doors, thumbs in his vest,
was negligently posed Sam Fisher.

"I've come for you, Mike," he said in the moment of dead silence.
"Chuck, you and your friends will be attended to by Mr. Arnold, here,
so be careful.  Mike, go for your gun----"

Mike had already gone for it, merely switching around the shotgun
atop the bar.  It burst into a shattering, deafening roar that
drowned the words of Sam Fisher.  Under the roar came the whiplike
crack of a revolver.

There was a crash and crackle of falling glass; the double load of
buckshot took out the front window with admirable unanimity.  Silence
fell, dread and ominous.  Galway Mike had fallen over his bar, and
lay there motionless.  Sam Fisher jerked his gun into its holster
again, his face hard and flinty, his eyes burning.

"Sorry about this, boys," he said, "but it's time that Mr. Buck and
his friends were put out of business."

"Who killed Cervantes?" yelled somebody.  Sam Fisher held up his hand.

"I'll tell you," he said, and there was silence.  "Three men hid in
the brush and shot Cervantes, ambushed him, murdered him without a
chance.  Two of those men did the shooting.  The third man was Chuck
Hansom, yonder.  One of the actual murderers is dead.  The other was
Templeton Buck--and I'm going to send him to the pen for it."

"You lie!" cried the shrill voice of Chuck Hansom.  "You lie!  You
done it yourself----"

"You devil, I seen the whole thing!" shouted Steve Arnold, breaking
loose.  "I seen it all----"

Chuck Hansom flung up his gun.  Arnold shot him before the hammer
fell.

Two shots echoed--Fisher fired twice at the ceiling, blew out the
lights, and was gone through the doorway, dragging the raging Arnold
with him.  Behind them the crowd began to mill in wild confusion, not
realizing what had happened, engulfed in darkness, fearing more shots
from the doorway.

"Confound you!" exclaimed Sam Fisher as he dragged his companion
along.  "What'd you drop him for?  We'd have had a confession out of
him later."

"I seen red," panted Steve.  "I jest couldn't help it, thinkin' of
the way they'd downed Miguel.  He was one o' the three."

"Duck in back o' the hotel, Steve; hurry up!  We got to make those
horses; there's going to be a string of hornets on our trail in a
hurry."

Five minutes later the two had ridden out of town.  Behind them the
lights and confusion died down, but both knew that parties of riders
would be on their trail ere long.  For a space they pushed their
horses in silence, then Fisher reined in.

"Long trail ahead, Steve; no use overdoin' it," he said.  "I got to
thank you for snaking me out of that storeroom.  How'd you find out?"

"Heard 'em talk in the front."  Arnold drew in at his stirrup.
"Listen!  Why in thunder didn't you tell me you was Sam Fisher?"

"I was aiming to keep it dark a while, Steve," returned the other
apologetically, "only things got to moving too lively and I had to
make the play.  Did you see Stella?"

"Yep!  And say!  I ain't had a chance to tell you yet; things have
busted loose aplenty!  Buck must ha' got Jake Harper."

"What!"  The word broke from Fisher like an explosion.  "What?  How
come?"

"I ain't certain."  Steve became calmer as he spoke.  "Right after I
got back to the Lazy S, Buck and this feller Chuck rode home, savvy?
I aimed to come right to town, only Stella was badly broken up about
Miguel, so I had to stick around a while.  Finally I had a chance to
tell her the rights of the whole business, so she up and tells me
that you was Sam Fisher himself.  It took us quite a spell gettin'
straightened out.  Then the poor ol' señora took to throwin' fits and
I had to give Stella a hand with her, which ate up considerable time.

"Well, I was gettin' saddled up, when in rode one of our veterans
from the Circle Bar, seekin' Jake.  Seems like Jake had started for
the Shumway place early this mornin' alone.  Must ha' clear dropped
out o' sight.  Stella told me to ride in and git you, which I done.
That's all we know."

Sam Fisher studied over this information for a time, gravely
perturbed.

"Steve, we're in for it, up to our necks!" he said at last.  "Buck is
makin' a great play for the Shumway place and Stella; at least, he
started that way.

"He knows nothing of what's happened in town.  He thinks that I'm in
jail, safe to be put away for the murder of Cervantes.  Cervantes is
dead and out of his way.  The only other obstacle in his path was
Jake Harper, and he must have arranged to handle the old man.  If he
has, by Heaven, I'll get him!  No--I won't get him.  I'll still send
him over the road."

"A bullet would simplify things a heap," and Arnold sighed.

"No, Steve."  Fisher's voice was grave, heavy, stern.  "Buck is the
prime mover behind all the deviltry up here.  It was Buck who sent
Frank Shumway to the pen--and that fellow Murphy, or Pincher Brady,
framed the deal from the capital.  I found a letter in Murphy's
pocket from Buck referring to it--clear enough evidence to free
Shumway."

"Glory be!" ejaculated Arnold with a sudden yell of delight.  "Is
that the truth?"

"It's the truth.  That letter is locked in the sheriff's desk--and
nobody knows about it.  Now, Murphy is safe out of the way, and we'll
get Frank loose from the pen in no time.  But Buck--give him a quick,
hot bullet?  Not much!  That devil is going behind the bars for life,
if I can send him!"

"I'm right sorry about Chuck Hansom, Red," Steve said slowly.

"Don't worry.  I don't believe Chuck would have squealed, anyhow.
Now, I have to be at the Shumway place to-morrow to handle that
coroner's jury; so do you with your evidence.  If we're going to
clean up this county, we have to do one thing at a time.  This affair
to-night has mussed up everything pretty badly.  If that gang from
town is allowed to come after us, it means a lot of shooting and
killing--which I want to avoid if possible.  Chuck and Mike deserved
what they got, but we can't shoot up a lot of hysterical fools who
think they're chasing a murderer.  With Buck and his gang it's
different.  Where Buck made his mistake was in murdering Cervantes;
that murder is going to cost a lot of blood."

"What about Jake Harper?" exclaimed Steve suddenly.

"I'm thinkin' about Jake right now--but if he's dead I can't help
him.  If he ain't, he's all right.  That coroner will be out
to-morrow morning with his jury; so will the preacher.  Until noon
to-morrow, I'm tied up.  And we've got to stop that mob.  Here,
Steve, let's tie the hosses and have a smoke."

Fisher dismounted abruptly and began to lead his horse off the road.
Arnold reined in and stared at the darkness.

"My gosh, have you gone crazy or what, feller?  We got no time to
smoke----"

"All the time in the world, cowboy!" came the whimsical, laughing
response.  "Get down and roll me one, will you?  Done lost my makin's
in the confusion back yonder."

With a sigh of resignation to what he considered utter folly, Steve
dismounted and joined his friend.  Fisher said nothing until a
cigarette was rolled and lighted; then:

"Steve, I've been thinking about those boys who are behind us.  Who's
leading them?  Nobody.  They'll cool off mighty quick after leaving
town.  They ain't sure just what has happened or who I am.  When they
strike trouble in the darkness they'll be all confused and imagining
things.  Now, all we got to do is like this----"

He spoke for a moment, low-voiced.

The crowd of men who rode out from town on the north road was headed
by the two Running Dog riders, who now had Chuck Hansom to avenge.
Only their savage spurrings had availed to rouse the crowd, in fact;
nobody was quite certain whether Miguel Cervantes had been murdered
by Fisher or by Templeton Buck.  The fall of Galway Mike and Chuck
Hansom had considerably cooled the enthusiasm of the mob, and by this
time many tales of Sam Fisher were being circulated.

Thus, by the time the crowd of riders came toward the crossroads, not
a few of them had trailed off back to town.  Under the starlight the
men rode in a clump at a steady jog.  Hereabouts the road was edged
by a dense thicket of manzanita.  From this thicket came a drawling
voice that caused every rein to jerk sharply at the bit.

"That's far enough, boys; halt!  You fellers from the Circle Bar--got
the front ones covered?  We'll attend to the rear."

"We got 'em, sheriff," came a deep bass voice.

"Leave 'em to us!" said a sharp falsetto.  Steve Arnold laughed from
somewhere.

"Sure, Fisher; sure!  Go ahead with your palaver."

The crowd halted as one man.  Their imaginations painted a dozen
voices from the clumps of brush.  They saw themselves trapped,
surrounded.  Men cursed and drew rein.

"I want a little talk, boys," said the invisible sheriff of Pecos.
"We don't aim to have any more bloodshed than we got to, and you
fellers are honest enough in your convictions.  Willing to listen a
minute?"

"Sure," said a nervous voice from the crowd.

"That's sensible."  Fisher's tone was grave, steady, holding them
spellbound.  "I'll be at the Lazy S to-morrow to meet the coroner and
the preacher.  This Cervantes murder is going to be handled by the
law.  You may think I did it; all right.  To-morrow the coroner's
jury will decide that little matter, and I'm spilling no secret when
I say their verdict is going to be hard on Templeton Buck.

"But I don't want a mob of you out there, messing things up and
starting trouble.  I want to propose a fair and square deal all
around.  You boys elect a committee of three to accompany the
coroner; the rest of you stick around town and wait.  If that suits
you, go on back home.  If it don't, then ride ahead--and take your
medicine.

"You two Running Dog men!  Come on alone a dozen steps.  I want a
personal word with you boys, and I'd advise you not to pull for any
guns.  Come on!"

There was a moment of hesitation.  Then the two punchers urged their
horses forward.  Into the road ahead came the figure of Sam Fisher on
foot.  Cowed, startled, fearful, the crowd watched to see what would
happen.

"If you two boys want to go on to the Running Dog," Fisher said
quietly, "you're free to go ahead.  But I warn you here and now that
your boss is facing trouble.  Every man with him will become an
accessory.  You know me, boys, and you know I mean what I say.  I'm
giving you fair warning.  Buck, it appears, got Jake Harper to-day,
and the Circle Bar outfit is behind me to the limit.  You know what
that means--every man of 'em a sharpshooter, out to kill!  The roads
are watched; your outfit will be shot down the minute you reach the
Running Dog buildings.  Ride on if you want to--but you can't come
back, boys."

The two riders sat motionless, drinking in his words.  Most of those
words had reached the crowd.  News that Buck had "got" Jake Harper
was paralyzing; it meant war to the finish with the Circle Bar.  Few
in the crowd doubted any longer that it was Buck who had murdered
Cervantes.  This sheriff of Pecos was too steady, too composed, too
certain of his position.  He was no murderer.

The two Running Dog men glanced at each other.  A word passed between
them; they knew full well what it meant if they rode forward.  But
they were men, unafraid.

"Much obliged, sheriff," said the foremost coolly.  "You're sure
actin' white.  Jest the same, we're workin' for the Runnin' Dawg and
we don't aim to lay down on the job."

"All right, boys; I'm sorry."  Fisher stood aside.  "The road's
yours!  Let these two boys pass, fellers--and plug the first to
follow."

"All right, Sam," came the voice of Arnold.

The two cowboys rode on.  Not a man followed them.  When they had
vanished into the darkness, Fisher stepped up and addressed the crowd.

"Well, gents?  Going to break through, or take my advice about
sending that committee?"

There was un uneasy laugh from the crowd.

"Guess we'll send the committee, sheriff."

With a surging of turned horses, the crowd headed about and started
back for town.  Fisher gazed after them until the darkness had
swallowed up the mob; then he turned, and found Steve Arnold at his
elbow.

"Red, you're sure a wonder!" exclaimed Steve admiringly.  "You done
it.  What next?"

"Riding," replied Fisher.  "Hard riding, Steve.  You know the country
better than I do.  You have to go ahead to the Circle Bar and get
every last one of Jake Harper's boys out around Buck's place; no
fighting, understand, but the Running Dog outfit must be cooped up.
Tell 'em to drop any man that rides out."

"Ain't enough of 'em," objected Arnold dubiously.

"Sure there is."  Fisher laughed.  "Those old fellows are dead shots,
Steve; you don't know 'em.  They'll circle out around the Running Dog
buildings and close up things tighter than a drum.  Anyhow, they have
to do it.  Tell them I'll be over to-morrow, after getting cleaned up
at the Lazy S.  And tell them to wait, understand?  Wait!  No
foolishness.  Then you come ahead to the Lazy S yourself.  I'm going
there now."

"S'pose Jake's all right?" suggested Arnold.  "We ain't certain that
Buck got him----"

"The orders stand.  If Jake's there, tell him it's a clean-up of the
Running Dog."

"Suits me, feller.  Adios!"

Arnold climbed into the saddle and was gone.




CHAPTER X

THE LAST STAKE

Templeton Buck might have a dirty streak in him, but he was no coward.

If the man's make-up held a large amount of deliberate criminality,
of cold and unscrupulous evil, it also held a large amount of
strength and resolute purpose.  Otherwise, Buck could never have
remained the leader of such men as followed him.

And on this bright and sunny morning Templeton Buck was facing the
hardest battle he had ever faced--a battle with himself.

On the previous night he had learned of the disaster which had
overwhelmed all his craftily laid plans.  True, he had Jake Harper a
prisoner, tied into the big chair before the fireplace.  But Robinson
had turned out to be Sam Fisher--and the roads were watched by the
Circle Bar men.

The story told by the two men on the previous night had been utterly
incredible, but with daylight it had been backed up when Sandy Davitt
undertook to ride forth.  Sandy's horse had been killed under him.
No one else tried to leave the Running Dog buildings.

Here in the living room of the ranch house, alone with the old man
tied into the chair, Buck paced up and down, fighting out his battle.
Would he lie to his men, or tell them the truth?  That was it.

From the chair old Jake Harper watched him with terrible, intent eyes.

"Give me your word to act gentle, and I'll loose you, Jake," said
Buck.

"I'll give you my word," said Jake, his voice deadly, "that all I
want is to git my hands on a gun, and I'll fill ye full o' lead, ye
mis'able coyote!"

So Jake Harper remained where he was.  Buck continued his steady
pacing back and forth, then suddenly came to a pause before his
captive and shot out a remark:

"Where I made a mistake was in killing Cervantes.  I should have
given him a chance."

Jake Harper swore at him angrily.

"Where you done made your mistake, Buck, was in tryin' to covet the
Shumway place.  You stole the Lazy S cattle, and you should ha'
stopped there."

Silence again.  Buck went on with his uneasy stride.  It was a
difficult decision which faced him.

At this moment, while he stood on the brink of disaster, Templeton
Buck for the first time saw clearly how things had come to this pass.
He was rich in money and land.  He did not need the Shumway land
added to his own.  He was powerful.

Being rich and powerful, he had thought himself secure, had
determined to get both Stella and the Lazy S, and had been careless
as to his methods.  Back in the old days, when Frank Shumway had
knocked him down, he had revenged himself by sending young Shumway to
the penitentiary--deliberately framing him.

He had not stopped there.  One thing had led to another--little
things, most of them.  Like a rolling snowball, the affair had gained
impetus.  The one man Buck had feared was Sam Fisher, the sheriff of
Pecos, and he had tried desperately to keep Fisher out of the way.
Even now, he perceived, Fisher was the one man who threatened him.

If he could only be rid of Fisher!  With Fisher out of the way all
would yet be well.  The murder of Cervantes could be met and faced
down; with Sheriff Tracy handling the affair, no jury in the county
would dare to convict Buck.  Jake Harper could be held a prisoner
until the mortgage was foreclosed.  Lies and false witnesses would
still serve to smooth the way.

Buck strode from the room, left the building, and passed over to the
corrals.  Here his entire outfit was lounging about as though waiting
for his coming.  Not until he met their nods and greetings did Buck
come to a full decision as to what he would do.

For, as yet, these punchers knew nothing of the Cervantes killing
beyond what had been reported from town.  None of them had witnessed
it.  All of them, beyond a doubt, held strong suspicions.  It had
been a despicable act, even in their eyes.

Buck came to a halt, beckoned to the men, and met their curious
stares with a flame of resolution in his eyes.

"Boys," he said quietly, "the story that Sam Fisher told in town was
true.  Steve Arnold must have seen the killing of Cervantes.  We
could have made it stick on Fisher, at that, if he hadn't been too
smart for me."

Every man there appreciated what this confession meant to Buck.

"Now, boys," went on the rancher, "Sam Fisher is no fool.  As things
stand right now, he's playin' a strong game and a winnin' game.  He's
got us blockaded here, and the only thing left for me is to take my
med'cine without a whine.  I aim to do it.  Still, that's no reason
for draggin' you boys into the same noose, so I'm here to give each
of you his time.  You ain't workin' for me no more."

An outburst of protest was quieted by Buck's uplifted hand, in which
was a roll of bills.

"Sandy Davitt!  Come an' git it, puncher."

Davitt stepped up, started to speak, reddened, and checked the words.
He took the money placed in his hand, and waited.  One by one the
other Running Dog men stepped up to Buck and received their wages.
When it was finished Buck smiled thinly.

"Now, I reckon, you-all can git past the Circle Bar men."

Nobody moved.  Of the eleven men who stood there in the sunlight
around the tall figure of Templeton Buck, none budged.  Sandy Davitt
glanced around, hitched up his belt, and grinned at the rancher.  His
cast eye gave the grin a baleful aspect.

"Buck," he said, "I opine we ain't workin' for you no more.  Is that
c'rect?"

"You said it, Sandy."

"Then, far as I'm concerned, I don't give a durn about Cervantes.
You've spoke out to us like a man, Buck, and by thunder I'm stickin'
right here!"

"And me!" chimed in a voice.  Then a chorus: "Me, too!  We stays
here, Buck!"

Buck stood in silence a long moment, his thin, high-boned features
flushed darkly.  It was a magnificent tribute these men paid him--a
tribute of which he was unworthy.  To the last one they were men;
reckless, scoundrelly if you like, but men unafraid.

"Ain't none of you ridin' to town?" asked Buck.

"Nary one, I guess," Sandy Davitt made response.  A growl of assent
backed him up.

"I appreciate this, boys; I sure do!"  Buck's tall figure
straightened up.  "Well, I give you the worst end of the talk on the
start.  It's true that Sam Fisher is playin' a winning hand so far,
but he ain't raked in the pot by a long sight!  He's bluffed out
Tracy, and he's got Pahrump buffaloed--but all he's got behind him is
the Circle Bar, and we've got Jake Harper here.  That means we got to
wipe out Sam Fisher to win the pot!"

"And Steve Arnold," corrected Davitt.  Buck nodded.

"Yep.  Them two, y' understand.  They're over to the Lazy S, as I get
it, while Harper's bunch has us held up here.  Also, we can't afford
to drop Fisher when, he comes to arrest me; it'd look too much like
he was killed in the performance of his duty, y' understand?  We want
to fix it so nobody won't know jest what happened.  Do you foller me?"

"You bet!" came the admiring response.  "How ye goin' to work it?"

Buck was silent for a moment, his eyes searching the surrounding
country.  Not a sign of the Circle Bar men was in evidence, but well
he knew that they were waiting, grimly hidden.

Almost any man, given the opportunity, will shoot rather than be sent
to the penitentiary, and Buck was now perfectly cool and steady in
his resolute air.  He had everything to gain and nothing to lose, and
a single bold, well-planned stroke might yet save him from the brink
of disaster.

"Twelve of us," he murmured.  "We might work it!  How many horses in
the corral, Sandy?"

"Close to thirty," returned Davitt at once.

"And the Circle Bar lays right up the valley from the Lazy S.
Anybody at Shumway's would be sure to see the Circle Bar if she was
burnin', I guess?"

Davitt straightened up in surprise.

"Certain, Buck, certain!  They'd see the smoke sure.  But how ye
goin' to reach the Circle Bar to fire her?"

Buck smiled weakly.  "That's the easiest part of it, Sandy.  This
here Sam Fisher, he never wants no crowd; it's always a lone-hand
play with him.  If him and Arnold seen the smoke from the Circle Bar,
what'd they do?"

"Light out to investigate where we were," was the response.  "They'd
know we'd got away from here and was busy.  And they'd come
a-smokin'."

"Exactly, Sandy," was Buck's triumphant return.  "Jest what I figger
my ownself."

"But how in time are we goin' to git away from here?"

Buck laughed and clapped his ex-foreman on the shoulder.

"Jest ride, cowboy, ride!" he exclaimed.  "All right, boys; rustle up
some grub and git saddled.  Bring out every hoss in the corral, rope
'em together, and wait.  Saddle an extry hoss for Jake Harper.
Sandy, come along and give me a hand with Jake."

Comprehending, at least in part, the bold scheme which Buck planned,
the men leaped into action.

Thirteen of the horses were saddled, the others were hastily strung
together; rifles were booted, packets of grub made up, canteens
filled.  By the time the punchers were mounted they had not long to
wait; Sandy Davitt and Buck appeared, shoving forward the figure of
old Jake Harper, hands firmly bound behind his back.  They could not
bind his tongue, however, and he cursed the entire gang with
vitriolic emphasis as he came.  The hearers smiled and grinned,
making no response.

"Climb or we boosts you, Jake," said Buck, reaching the spare saddle.

The boost was necessary, and was given; following which the old scout
was firmly lashed in the saddle.  At Buck's orders a reata was put
about his neck, the loose end of which Buck took over when he had
mounted.  Then, revolver in hand, Buck gave the word to ride north.

"Take it easy, boys," he ordered.  "No hurry."

His strategy became only too apparent to friend and foe alike.  Any
shots from ambush would draw an instant bullet into the body of Jake
Harper; the menace of the rope and Buck's drawn revolver were
entirely obvious.

Buck himself rode in the van, Jake Harper a little in front.  Behind,
the Running Dog men spread out, the extra horses crowding up in the
rear.  As they wound out on the way, Jake Harper perceived how he was
being used, and he sent a booming roar of command at the empty spaces
around, where he knew his men were hidden.

"Fire into 'em, boys!  Shoot!  Don't ye mind me!  Shoot!"

No response was made.  None could be made; the Circle Bar outfit
dared not call the silent bluff that Buck was running.  Well they
knew that the bluff would be backed up.

Without a shot being fired, without an enemy being sighted, the
Running Dog men rode off in peace.  After them, undoubtedly, would
trail Harper's men, but it would take some time for the latter to
collect and follow.

Immediately upon reaching the highway, Buck halted and lifted a hand.

"I want two of you boys to take all the spare hosses and ride on to
the Circle Bar.  Fire her, barns and all, and kill your beasts
gettin' there.  It's got to be done quick.  Harper's outfit will
likely foller your trail.  Four stays here to hold 'em up half an
hour, no more.  The rest goes with me."

Two of the men at once gathered in the lines of the spare horses,
waved an adios, and went north at a gallop.  To the four who
announced themselves as ready to hold up the pursuit, Buck gave a few
brief words.

"No killin' if ye can help it.  Shoot the hosses.  Then make your
get-away to town and wait for news.  If I win I'll join ye there
to-night.  If not, then beat it into Laredo County and lay low.  Good
luck to ye, boys!"

"Same to you!" they rejoined, and scattered out to take position.

Five men with him, besides their captive, Buck turned from the road
and led the way toward the hills.

Old Jake Harper cursed luridly as he perceived the really admirable
strategy that was under way, although its object was hidden from him.
When the Circle Bar came up, they would be delayed appreciably by the
four men.  When at last left free to take the trail, they would
naturally follow that left by the largest number of horses, leading
toward their home ranch.  And in the meantime Buck would be somewhere
else.

"What's the big idea, Buck?" asked Sandy Davitt, riding at the
rancher's stirrup.  "Where we off for?"

"Git through the hills, hit the valley trail beyond, and lay up,"
said Buck with a grin.  "Sam Fisher and Arnold are bound to come that
way from the Lazy S when they see the smoke, ain't they?"

Sandy Davitt slapped his thigh with a loud guffaw.

"Whoop-ee!  Buck, you sure wins the deal!  And while we gathers in
the sheriff o' Pecos and his pal, the Circle Bar outfit is millin'
around tryin' to find out what's done happened, eh?"

"Somethin' like that, Sandy," and Buck grinned confidently.

Jake Harper fell silent from sheer desperation.




CHAPTER XI

THE TRAP IS SPRUNG

In less than an hour Buck and his party were assured that they had
nothing to fear from any trailing Circle Bar riders.  They rode
through the hills and gained the farther slopes of the divide, with
the rolling river flat beyond.

Here Buck drew rein, pointing.

There was no need for words, although Jake Harper, with recovered
vocabulary, spilled pardonable curses upon the air.  To the-north was
ascending a stream of heavy smoke that rose straight into the
windless sky.

"They done it," said Sandy Davitt briefly.

"Two of you boys stay here with Jake," ordered Buck to his five.  "If
you don't get no word from me by dark, turn Jake loose and make your
getaway.  If I win, I'll send word to ye 'fore dark."

Nobody wanted to remain, so straws were pulled.  The losers,
disgruntled, took over the prisoner's bridle and sat their horses
while Buck, Sandy Davitt, and the remaining two men rode on.

"Good luck!" they called.  Buck responded with a wave of his white
Stetson.

The four men who were left in company now pushed their horses ahead
at a good clip.  Two miles away was the river trail, which Arnold and
Sam Fisher would follow, provided they did the expected thing.

"Gosh, she's sure a-smoking!" observed Sandy Davitt, his squint gaze
flitting to the smoke in the north.  "They done it, all right.  Fired
everything in sight!  I'll bet Jake will curse over losin' his first
cuttin' of alfalfa.  He only laid it in last week."

Buck smiled weakly, but made no response.  If he lost his stake, he
would lose more than alfalfa.

Knowing to what manner of work they rode, the four pressed on warily,
eyes searching the landscape ahead.  They were unlikely to meet any
one here.  The Lazy S and Circle Bar lands ran together at a short
distance, and the river road was only a trail used by the few riders
of the two ranches.

They came upon it at last, and simultaneously drew rein.  The trail
told them a plain story; no one had passed this way within the past
few hours, at least.

"What you aim to do?" asked one of the punchers as they sat
motionless.  "Rope him?"

"Rope him?"  Buck spat a vicious oath.  "We'd look fine ropin' that
gent--and Arnold!  What would we want to rope 'em for?"

Sandy Davitt laughed harshly.  He swung up his arm to a bend in the
road fifty yards to their left.

"Stick right here, Buck, and drop 'em as they come around that bend.
Don't need the rifles to do it.  Better hobble the cayuses in this
bresh."

Buck nodded assent.  A better place for the ambush could not be found.

The four men dismounted.  One of the punchers led off the animals.
The other three went to the river bank, here a scant hundred yards
distant, and slaked their thirst.  Upon rising, Buck gave his orders.

"We'd better spread out jest far enough to keep an eye out in both
directions.  I'll watch the south for 'em, Sandy, attend to the
Circle Bar end; ain't likely any one will come, but we'd better watch
that way, too."

Sandy Davitt swung off, followed by his companion.

Buck sought a position whence he could obtain a fair view of the
valley in the direction of the Shumway ranch.  He did not need to
have the winding road in view.  Even this slightly used trail was
deep in dust, and any rider would leave a brown smudge that would
rise into a trailing wedge to be discerned afar.

The horses were hidden away from sight among the trees that fringed
the river.  To the north the great splotch of smoke had lessened into
a thin trail; Harper's place was burned out.  It could not be long
now before Fisher would come--if he came at all.

"Hey, Buck!" rose the cautious voice of Davitt.  "Rider from the
north!"

"Comin'," responded Buck hastily, and ran to join his men.

The north trail was nearly hidden from them, but they could make out
a trail of dust, and presently the swiftly moving object which had
drawn the attention of Davitt.  As this object came closer Davitt
uttered an impatient exclamation.

"Ain't no rider at all!  By gosh, it's a hoss!"

"It's Jake Harper's hoss, Celestine," added Buck, watching the
approaching beast.

"He got away from us when we nabbed Jake yestiddy," said Sandy
Davitt.  "Git a rope, boys----"

"Stop!" ordered Buck.  "Git off the trail, quick; leave the brute go
through!  It'll fetch Sam Fisher jest that much quicker."

They hastened to clear the way.  A moment more and the pound of hoofs
came to them, and along the trail dashed the rawboned brute at a mad
gallop, his vicious eyes rolling wildly, panic driving him.  He was
past them like a whirlwind, and went pounding away to the south.

"Fire scart him," said Davitt, emerging into the road again.  "Good
idee to let him go, Buck.  Scatter out, everybody!  Keep yer eyes
skinned!"

It was only a moment later that Buck's voice rose warningly:

"Dust a-comin', boys!  Git together!"

Excitement spurred them as they ran in to the place of ambush.  From
here they had a view of the road farther down the river; they stood
motionless, guns drawn, tense with expectation.  Davitt and Buck were
together on one side of the road, the other two men opposite them.

Into the patch of road down the river crept a moving object, dust
trailing it.  From Davitt broke one astounded oath.

"Look out thar, boys!  It's Stella Shumway comin'; out o' sight,
quick!  Duck, you devils, duck!  Let her go through; likely they'll
be behind her."

Davitt and Buck plunged down into the brush, the others following
suit.  Hoofs came pounding; around the bend just ahead plunged Stella
Shumway, wildly spurring her horse forward.  The Circle Bar smoke had
drawn her as well as others.  Her strained and drawn face showed the
girl's inward anxiety.

"Hurry, boy, hurry!" she cried to her mount.  "We're ahead of them
yet; we've got to find Uncle Jake!  Hurry, hurry----"

Her voice died into the distance.  Almost before she had gone, Davitt
was out in the road, then swinging himself into a tree for a swifter
view of the lower valley.

"They're comin' behind her," said Buck, his voice steady.  "Now the
only question is--who's a-comin'?  If it's a hull blamed crowd, we
got to lay low.  If it's them two----"

"Hey, Buck!"  Davitt came sliding down, plunged into the dust, sprang
eagerly to his feet again.  "Two comin'--no more that I can see.
Likely they stopped to halt Harper's hoss, or try to, and the gal
went on ahead.  Them two'll be our meat; couldn't be no others.
Watch the road now----"

The four craned forward, intent.  Into the patch of road down the
river slid the forms of two horses, galloping neck and neck.

"Got 'em!" cried Buck triumphantly.  "Git set, boys; let 'em have it
as they come around this here bend."

They scurried to their places, eager with the trembling thrill of the
man hunt, fired out of themselves by the hot lust for blood, careless
of the thing they were about to do.  Hidden, they waited, guns at the
level, bloodshot eyes trained on the bend of the trail.

Came a furious drive of hoofs pounding the dusty trail.  Through it
lifted the voice of Steve Arnold gayly, boyishly:

"Whoop-ee!  Out o' my way, cowboy!  I'm crowdin' you for room; gimme
air!  Go git a good hoss if ye want to ride with me----"

Buck's lips curved cruelly; they were coming together, racing neck
and neck!

And then--they came.  Plunging around the bend together, Sam Fisher
and Arnold, low in the saddle, driving their white-flecked horses,
racing to catch up with the girl ahead and reach the cause of that
smoke reek in the sky.

_Crack_!  Pistols roared from either side the road.  The two riders
caromed together, a horse sent up its horrible scream, men and beasts
went flinging down in a terrible crash.

Mad with the killing, Buck's two punchers leaped into sight across
the road, ran forward.  From the great cloud of dust cracked a shot,
and another.  The foremost man fell on his face; the second coughed,
spun around, and dropped.

"Got you!" yelled Arnold.

At the same instant Buck shot, Davitt close behind him.  Arnold,
dimly visible amid the dust, fell back and straightened out.  But, as
though in echo to those two shots, came another from the dust.
Buck's hat jerked from his head.

"By gosh, Fisher's still klckin'!" cried Sandy Davitt in stark
amazement.

An oath burst from Buck.  He fired into the dust again and again,
frenzied.  One shot answered him, and one only; the bullet seared
across his face, sent him down into the grass wiping at his cheeks,
swearing, death frightened.  Yet he was unhurt.

Both Davitt and Buck crouched low, peering forward, waiting for the
dust to settle.  It seemed impossible that Fisher could have gone
down in that awful welter of death and yet have remained alive; but
he was not dead.  The shot had shown that.

Little by little the dust subsided.  Arnold's horse, its shoulder
smashed by a bullet, raised a shaking head and emitted another
frightful scream, then fell back.  The other horse lay behind,
kicking feebly, trying to grip the ground with its fore hoofs; the
poor beast's back was broken.

Midway between the two animals lay the body or Steve Arnold, face to
the sky.  But of Sam Fisher there was no sign.

"My gosh!" breathed Davitt incredulously.  "He ain't there.  Ah,
behind his hoss, Buck!  There he is!"

Buck fired, and swore at the miss as he ducked to escape an answering
shot.  None came.  Sandy Davitt, unable to bear the sight of what had
been done, deliberately leaned forward and shot the two horses.  He,
too, ducked low, but no shot answered.

"The son of a gun!" muttered Buck hoarsely.  "He's playing possum,
Sandy.  Watch out!  He wants a good shot at us."

"I'll bet he does," assented Davitt fervently.

For long moments the two men crouched there, peering forward, seeking
any sign of movement.  None came.  The sun beat down on the scene,
flooding with pitiless light each terrible detail on the shot-up
Steve Arnold, the two horses, the two Running Dog men who had paid
the price.  And still Sam Fisher remained silent.

At last Buck, unable to stand the strain, went suddenly to his feet.

"All right, you can have your chance!" he cried, and flung himself
forward.

Davitt watched, ready to fire at Fisher's shot.  But, to his
amazement, he saw Buck check his rush, lower his pistol, and turn.

"All right, Sandy."  Buck's voice was hoarse.  "It's all over.  We
got 'em."

Davitt slowly rose, still half fearful of a trap.  Then he put up his
gun and stared at his work in silence.

"We win," said Buck softly, and there was none to say him nay.




CHAPTER XII

THE CLEAN-UP

A little later Buck and Sandy Davitt sat in the dust, cigarettes in
their still tremulous hands, and watched their victims.

"After all, we bungled it a heap," said Davitt morosely.  "Now
there'll be hell to pay and no pitch hot!  Buck, we'd ought to finish
it."

Before them lay Steve Arnold, shot through the leg and with an ugly
scalp wound; unconscious, but far from dead.  The sheriff of Pecos
lay beside Arnold, and was equally unconscious.  His right knee had
been dislocated in the fall, he had a bullet through the right
shoulder, another had broken his right wrist.

"We'd ought to finish 'em for our own sake now," repeated Sandy
Davitt.

Buck shook his head.  He was white to the lips.

"Do it if you can, Sandy.  I can't."

Sandy Davitt picked up his gun, compressed his lips, then with an
oath thrust the weapon away.  It was more than he could do.  Buck
smiled ironically.

"It ain't so bad, at that," he observed.  "They're both put out o'
business and in our hands; anyhow, it's better'n if we'd killed them,
Sandy.  Here's the story.  They come on us and started shooting;
downed them two boys yonder 'fore we could git into action.  Savvy?
So we let 'em have it in self-defense.  How you goin' to prove
otherwise?"

Davitt nodded, and his face cleared.  "All right.  But I see plain
how come Sam Fisher missed us with them two shots; he done the work
with his left hand."

"He didn't miss far at that."  Buck shivered a little.

"Thanks," said Sam Fisher, opening his eyes.  "So it ain't a dream
after all, Buck?  Say, I'd appreciate it a lot if you gents would do
somethin' to my right knee."

Buck looked at his companion.  By tacit consent they rose and
approached their victims, who had been thoroughly disarmed.  Fisher
turned his head and inspected Steve Arnold.

"Well, this ain't so bad!" he observed.  "Look after Steve first,
Buck.  His leg is sure pumping out a lot o' blood.  Tie him up good."

"You shut up," said Buck roughly.  "Catch on here, Sandy."

They rudely bandaged Arnold's leg, found that his scalp wound was not
serious, and turned to Sam Fisher.  Investigation confirmed his
previous schedule of injuries.

"She's dislocated," announced Sandy.  "Buck, catch hold of the ankle;
I got the thigh.  Go to it."

Sam Fisher lay back, his fingers gripping at the dirt, a sweat of
agony beading his brow.  It was done.  He said no word as the two men
effected a hasty bandaging of his broken right wrist and wounded
shoulder.  Then they stood erect above him.

"Sandy," said Buck, steady and calm once more, "you got to ride on
the back trail in a hurry.  Find the boys we left with Jake Harper
and bring 'em on."

"You can't stay here with 'em," said Sandy Davitt roughly.

"I don't aim to.  We got two extra hosses.  Tie Arnold in one saddle;
Fisher can ride without bein' tied, I reckon.  Anyway, he's got to!
You help me with 'em, then ride on hard for the boys.  We'll put
these two with Jake and hold 'em safe for a spell, then I'll clean up
everything here and light out.  A week will do it."

"You aim to light out, do you?" asked Davitt in surprise.  Buck
nodded.

"Yep.  It's that or kill Sam Fisher, and I guess I've gone my limit
to-day, Sandy.  We've done a-plenty."

"Suit yourself."  Sandy Davitt shrugged.

"Besides, Tracy will be back soon.  We'll lay charges o' this
murder," and Buck pointed to the two dead men, "against 'em both and
lock 'em up.  We'll git clear off 'fore they are able to travel.
Dog-gone it!  If Fisher was whole, I'd say shoot, but he's too much
shot up, Sandy.  Dogged if I can do it now!"

They led out the horses.  Into one saddle they lifted the unconscious
Arnold, and then lashed him firmly in place.  With an effort, Sam
Fisher gained his feet, his right hand dangling in its bandage.  The
ghost of his old whimsical smile touched his lips.

"Put me up, gents, and I guess I can ride," he said quietly.  "And I
still got one good hand for the reins----"

"The reins ain't goin' to trouble you none," intervened Buck.
"Ready, Sandy!"

Once he was placed in the saddle, Fisher clung to the pommel, his
face livid; the pain of the operation was intense.  However, he would
be able to ride fairly well.

"All right, Sandy," said Buck as he strung together the reins of the
two horses.  "Git off and on your way, cowboy!  And use them spurs."

Sandy Davitt leaped to his saddle, yelled at his cayuse, and was gone
in a mad rush.

For a little Sam Fisher could only cling to his pommel, faint with
pain, his head swirling.  When he came to himself he found himself
riding beside the still senseless Steve Arnold.  Buck rode in front,
their reins fastened to his saddle, his rifle across the pommel.  He
glanced back and glinted a hard smile at the sheriff of Pecos.

"You're luckier than most, Fisher.  Yes, sir, you sure are.  If it'd
been anybody else you'd be dead this minute."

Sam Fisher tried to smile.  "I don't see, Buck, why in thunder you
didn't finish the job.  It isn't like you to weaken at killing a man."

"I may yet."  Buck eyed him morosely.  "Reckon I got sentimental for
a spell."

"Then you'd better do it quick," said Fisher, "for I'll sure get you,
Buck.  Yes, sir, I'll sure----"

His words ended in a groan of anguish and he clutched at the pommel.

Buck smiled.  "I reckon you won't do no gettin' for some while to
come, sheriff; you with a bum laig, a busted arm, and a bullet
through the shoulder!"

"I've still got one good arm."  Fisher tried to smile, but his lips
twisted in pain.  A groan was torn from him again.  "This knee!  I
can't ride with it, Buck."

"You got to," said Buck shortly.

At this time, from the wooded hills ahead of them, came a single
rifle shot that echoed and died away.  Buck frowned and vainly
searched the hills with his eyes.  Nothing was in sight.

For ten minutes the three pursued their slow course.  Fisher clung to
his saddle; every movement of his horse caused him torture.  At last
a cry burst from his lips--a cry so bitter, so desperate in its
suffering that Buck drew rein.

"Buck!  I can't do it!  I can't do it!  You got to put your coat or
somethin' under my knee; it's more'n I can bear."

The man reeled in the saddle as he spoke; he was bent, broken, all
his iron nerve shattered by the agony of his tortured body.  His blue
eyes, dulled with pain, stared horribly at Buck.

The rancher, a trace of pity in his harsh features, silently nodded.
He put the rifle in its boot and took off his corduroy coat.  This he
rolled loosely, then edged his horse beside that of the swaying
Fisher.

"Ease up on your laig now while I shove her underneath."

Fisher reeled, caught at the shoulder of Buck as the latter stooped.
Another groan broke from his lips when Buck thrust the rolled
corduroy beneath his leg.  Then suddenly----

Fisher's left hand caught the revolver from the holster of the
stooping rancher.  Swift as light he slashed the front sight across
the head of Buck.

"Still got one hand, Buck!" lifted his voice.

Buck hardly knew what had hit him.  That front-sight blow stunned
him, raked his skull almost to the bone, left a grisly wound.
Blindly putting one hand to his head, Buck uttered a hoarse cry,
plunged forward, and rolled to the earth senseless.

For a moment Fisher sat gazing down, the revolver in his hand.

"Good work, Sam!" lifted a roaring voice from the trees.  "Good work!
I was jest gettin' a bead on the skunk when you riz up."

Jake Harper urged a horse into sight, uncocking his rifle as he came.
Fisher stared at him weakly, hardly realizing what the man's
appearance here meant.

"You got away?" he murmured.

"You bet!  Any time I can't git out o' buckskin thongs when they's
water handy to stretch 'em---- Good gosh, Sam!  What's happened?"

Sam Fisher reeled a little.  Jake looked at the limp figure of
Arnold, perceived that Fisher himself was swaying in the saddle.

"Me, I'm about all in, Jake," said the whimsical voice.  "You got to
do the rest.  Don't hurt Buck, mind; he's got to go to the pen.  I
have the goods on him.  You have to take us back to the Lazy S--but
look out!  Look out for that man Sandy----"

Jake Harper dismounted, rushed to Fisher's side, and caught the
sheriff of Pecos as he went limp.

"Don't you worry none about Sandy Davitt," he said grimly.  "That's
his hoss I'm ridin' now.  Didn't ye hear a shot a while back?"

But Sam Fisher could make no response.




CHAPTER XII

FINIS

In a room of the Lazy S ranch house Sam Fisher lay upon a cot;
another held Steve Arnold, both men bandaged, splinted, and smoking
cheerfully.  Beside the sheriff of Pecos sat Estella Shumway, in her
eyes a glow of happiness such as they had not known for months.

Jake Harper, caressing his glossy black mustache, stood in the center
of the room.  He was just leaving for town.  Behind him stood his
half-crippled foreman, surveying Sam Fisher with a wolfish smile on
his ancient features.

Jake clapped his foreman on the shoulder.

"Listen, Sam!" he said earnestly.  "This here old relic, which same
has fit more Injuns than kids like you ever seen, is agoin' to camp
outside the door of that there cell we puts Mr. Buck into.  Three
more of my outfit camps in the jail likewise, until you gits there in
person.  If you figger Buck gittin' away from them four you guess
again."

"C'rect; Jake," and Sam Fisher laughed softly.  "Hold Buck there
until I can reach town, that's all.  You don't think any one will try
to rescue him?"

Jake Harper pursed up his lips.

"Rescue him?  Not much.  The coroner's verdict will guarantee him a
quick trial for the murder of Miguel, won't it?  And I'm goin' to
stick around town my ownself.  Don't you worry none about any rescue.
Them decrepit Injun fighters of mine is runnin' his whole outfit, or
what's left of it, out the county."

"All right," said Fisher, nodding.  "You take the keys to the
sheriff's office--they're with the others I gave you--and look inside
the sheriff's desk for those papers about Buck and Murphy.  They must
go to the governor at once; I'll have to go with 'em, I guess, so
that puts it off a few days.  Those papers are more important than
anything else, Buck; they prove that Frank Shumway was framed and
that it was done through Murphy.  We'll get a full confession out of
Murphy, beyond a doubt.  So we want to get the matter up to the
governor and get a pardon for Frank at the earliest moment."

"I'll attend to them," promised Jake.  He stepped forward and held
out his hand.  "So long!  _Hasta la vista!_"

"Say, Jake!"  Over their clasped hands Fisher looked up, a twinkle in
his eye.  "One thing more!  Send that preacher out here to-morrow,
will you?"

"What for?" demanded Jake in surprise.

"Never mind.  You send him."

"All right.  So long, Stella; see you later!"

Jake and his foreman stamped out.  Stella Shumway looked at the
sheriff of Pecos, her face very red.

"Sam, what do you want that preacher for?"

"Wait a minute."  Fisher lifted himself on his good elbow, and looked
at the adjoining cot.  He met the grinning features of Steve Arnold,
and made a fierce grimace.  "You, Steve!  If I was you, cowboy, I'd
look the other way--right at that wall.  It's a heap interesting."

With a chuckle Steve obeyed and turned his head.

Fisher dropped on his pillows, and reaching out, seized the hand of
the girl.

"Stella, I done bought the ranch, and I'll pay that mortgage,
too--but you ain't told me yet if it's done with your consent.  You
know, Stella----"

The girl's eyes met his in a smiling glory.

"I don't aim to leave the old place, Sam," she said softly, and bent
her lips to his.



THE END











End of Project Gutenberg's The Sheriff of Pecos, by Henry Bedford-Jones

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SHERIFF OF PECOS ***

***** This file should be named 60797-8.txt or 60797-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/0/7/9/60797/

Produced by Al Haines
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
