Project Gutenberg's The Utah Batteries: A History, by Charles R. Mabey

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Utah Batteries: A History
       A complete account of the muster-in, sea voyage, battles,
       skirmishes and barrack life of the Utah batteries, together
       with biographies of officers and muster-out rolls.

Author: Charles R. Mabey

Release Date: May 2, 2010 [EBook #32206]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE UTAH BATTERIES: A HISTORY ***




Produced by Graeme Mackreth and The Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)







THE UTAH BATTERIES:

A HISTORY.




THE UTAH BATTERIES:

A HISTORY.

A COMPLETE ACCOUNT OF THE MUSTER-IN, SEA VOYAGE,
BATTLES, SKIRMISHES AND BARRACK LIFE
OF THE UTAH BATTERIES, TOGETHER
WITH BIOGRAPHIES OF OFFICERS
AND MUSTER-OUT ROLLS.

by

CHARLES R. MABEY,

LATE A SERGEANT OF LIGHT BATTERY A, UTAH VOLUNTEER ARTILLERY.

ILLUSTRATED.

SALT LAKE CITY,
1900.




COPYRIGHT APPLIED FOR.


DAILY REPORTER CO., PRINTERS, 158-160 S. WEST TEMPLE ST.

SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH.




TO THE UTAH BATTERYMEN

WHO BRAVELY FOUGHT FOR THEIR COUNTRY'S FLAG ON A FOREIGN

SOIL, THIS BOOK IS RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED

BY

THE AUTHOR.




PREFACE.


Sometime after the Utah Battalion left San Francisco for the Philippines
the author conceived the idea of writing a history of that organization
after its return from the war. With this purpose in view he kept a diary
during the entire campaign and also collected what other material that
could be utilized for such a work. Immediately upon the arrival in Salt
Lake City of the discharged volunteers he, with others, set to work to
bring about a completion of this plan. This little volume represents the
result of the labor expended at intervals between that date and the
present time. The author claims no more for it than its title assumes--a
brief history of the Utah batteries. It is no more. There may be some
works in the future which will command, to a greater extent, the
attention of the reading public. This is not written with the idea that
it will become a standard work, but that while those events which
happened are yet green in the memories of the Utah artillerymen, they
may be recorded and not be consigned to oblivion. The author trusts he
may not be asserting too much when he affirms that the book is written
with a strict adherence to facts, as he has had access both to public
and private data in the compiling of the work, and he has been
scrupulously careful in guarding against errors of every description. At
this opportunity he takes pleasure in thanking those officers and men
who have helped him in bringing about an accomplishment of his plans,
and furthermore, he wishes to extend his thanks to Angus K. Nicholson
for his contributions and a like communication to those friends who have
given him timely advice and aid in disposing of difficulties which have
arisen from time to time.

BOUNTIFUL, January 25, 1900.




CONTENTS.


PAGE                                                          7

PREFACE

INTRODUCTION                                                 13

CHAPTER I.--The Mustering                                    16

CHAPTER II.--Barrack Life                                    24

CHAPTER III.--The Insurrection                               36

CHAPTER IV.--The Gunboats                                    77

CHAPTER V.--The Home Coming                                  90

MAJOR RICHARD W. YOUNG                                      102

MAJOR FRANK A. GRANT                                        103

CAPTAIN E.A. WEDGEWOOD                                      105

CAPTAIN JOHN F. CRITCHLOW                                   106

LIEUTENANT GEORGE W. GIBBS                                  108

LIEUTENANT RAYMOND C. NAYLOR                                109

LIEUTENANT ORRIN R. GROW                                    110

LIEUTENANT WILLIAM C. WEBB                                  112

LIEUTENANT GEORGE A. SEAMAN                                 113

LIEUTENANT FRANK T. HINES                                   114

LIEUTENANT JOHN A. ANDERSON                                 115

SERGEANT HARRY A. YOUNG                                     116

SERGEANT FORD FISHER                                        118

ROSTER--Battery A                                           120

Battery B                                                   125




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


                                                            PAGE

A FAMILIAR SCENE                                             27

OLD GUARD FATIGUE AT THE CUARTEL                             33

LIEUTENANT GIBBS' SECTION AT FT. MACARTHUR                   47

GUN AT PUMPING STATION FIRING ON MARIQUINA                   50

UTAH GUNS ON MANILA & DAGUPAN RY. EN ROUTE TO THE FRONT      53

FIRST PLATOON, BATTERY A, READY TO MOVE TO MALOLOS           59

UTAH GUNS IN PARK AT CONGRESSIONAL HALL, MALOLOS             65

PREPARING FOR AN ENGAGEMENT                                  74

MAJOR RICHARD W. YOUNG                                      102

MAJOR FRANK A. GRANT                                        104

CAPTAIN E.A. WEDGEWOOD                                      106

CAPTAIN JOHN F. CRITCHLOW                                   107

LIEUTENANT GEORGE W. GIBBS                                  108

LIEUTENANT RAYMOND C. NAYLOR                                110

LIEUTENANT ORRIN R. GROW                                    111

LIEUTENANT WILLIAM C. WEBB                                  112

LIEUTENANT GEORGE A. SEAMAN                                 114

LIEUTENANT FRANK T. HINES                                   115

LIEUTENANT JOHN A. ANDERSON                                 116

SERGEANT HARRY A. YOUNG                                     117

SERGEANT FORD FISHER                                        119




THE UTAH BATTERIES.

INTRODUCTION.


The history of the Utah Batteries should be a plain tale, for deeds of
valor cannot be garnished by the flower of rhetoric or the pomp of
oratory. This is a simple story of brave deeds. The stern browed
Heracles standing unarmed in the midst of his countrymen was a frank,
common figure, but when he dashed like Ares upon the Lerneaen hydra he
became majestic, and no mere pen picture could augment his greatness. So
we shall paint a picture of the achievements of the cannoneers and
gunners of Utah while withstanding the onslaughts of the dusky warriors
of Aguinaldo, and no greater compliment can be paid them than a clear
true narrative of their exploits.

Utah was early distinguished in the furious fights of Luzon. Even before
the soldiers of "Uncle Sam" had felt their way into the defenses of
Manila, her guns had awaked the long-sleeping sentries of the Dons and
torn holes into the bulwarks of Spanish oppression and tyranny. Her
later accomplishments against the fierce Tagalan braves have only served
to increase the homage and admiration of the world, yet, in the dark
days of the conflict, as veterans know, are performed many daring acts
and feats of human strength, which are never recorded in the chronicles
of fame, or proclaimed by the bugle's blare. There were those who knew
what it was to feel the pangs of hunger and the ravages of disease,
those who experienced the racking pains occasioned by fatiguing marches,
and long, weary tramps through the unbroken wilderness of the tropics;
and there were belated ones who hid in the swamps anxiously watching
for the first beams of dawn to reveal the lurking foe.

An account of the actions of the men of Utah is not a recital of the
performances of one man; neither is it a description of the doings of a
particular section of men. It is the story of brave men fighting under
competent chiefs. Their history is exceptional. In every engagement
against the insurrectionists, on land and river, the unceasing fire of
the guns of Utah was heard. While Major Young, Major Grant, Captain
Critchlow and Lieutenant Seaman battered down the enemy's breastworks at
Caloocan and San Lazerus cemetery, the cannon under Captain Wedgewood
hurled fiery wrath into the terrified foe at Sampaloe, and Lieutenant
Webb's death-dealing monsters flung destruction into the ranks of the
Filipino hordes at Santa Mesa. While the land batteries, with the
infantry, worked their way through the tropical forests in that campaign
which drove the natives out of Calumpit and San Fernando and sent
Aguinaldo flying into the mountains beyond, Major Grant, Lieutenant
Naylor and Lieutenant Webb, with their fire-spitting dragons, the river
gunboats, bore down upon the insurgents at Morong and Santa Cruz and
disturbed the silence of the primitive woods at San Luiz and Candaba.

The country was not slow in recognizing Utah. Almost as soon as
hostilities commenced Major Young was elevated to a position on General
MacArthur's staff, and when the river gunboats were put into commission
in anticipation of a Tagalan outbreak Lieutenant R.C. Naylor was placed
second in command. Later when the river fleet was enlarged Major Grant
took command and Lieutenant William C. Webb assumed control of the
"Covadonga," positions which both held till Utah's fighting days were
over.

The Utah cannoneers were not only exceptional as fighters, but they did
things before unheard of in artillery annals. They pushed along in line
with the infantry in many a hard-fought encounter in the vanguard;
during the early days of the conflict, when the rival force first turned
its weapons upon the walls of Manila, they hauled their pieces after
them in grim pursuit of the fleeing foe. They stood comparison with the
well-drilled regulars, and in many instances surpassed them; the bark of
their iron-tongued guns never failed to strike terror into the hearts of
the dusky braves of Luzon, while it ever sounded as a note of cheer to
the infantrymen on the straggling skirmish line.

There is Santa Mesa, Malabon, Quingua, Bag Bag, San Fernando--words
hollow sounding to the ordinary ear; but when named to the stalwart
veteran they touch a chord which quickens the pulse and sets every nerve
fiber vibrating with emotion. To him each tells a tale of noble
achievements wrought beneath the broiling sun of the tropics; to him
each whispers an assurance that his duty was bravely done in the
blasting fires of the East.

The warriors of Utah have listened to their last reveille and their last
retreat. When they withdrew from the Orient they left the scenes of
carnage behind and returned to loved ones and to peace. May that peace
be lasting and happy.




CHAPTER I.

THE MUSTERING.


When the war trumpet's shrill notes disturbed the serenity of this
tranquil land early in '98 their echoes were not lost on the hills of
Utah, but reverberating from cliff to cliff and peak to peak they
swelled into a martial hymn whose chorus was sung in every home in the
commonwealth. The dark stormy days preceding the declaration of war in
April had aroused the dormant energies of men, hitherto engaged in the
peaceful pursuits of life, and filled them with an eager desire to
perform the more exciting duties of the camp, so that when the call was
issued by Governor Wells on April 25th a host of young men from every
corner of the State applied for enlistment in the volunteer army.

Out of the 500 men, Utah's original quota, 343 were designated for the
Light Artillery service. There are reasons for this not altogether
understood by those outside military circles. At the breaking out of
hostilities with Spain the National Guard of the various States were
deficient in this branch of the service. The guns consisted mostly of
obsolete and useless muzzle-loading cannon, divided among the States at
the close of the Civil War. Some were smooth bores, others rifled. There
were Napoleons and Parrots, brass cannon and twenty-four pounders. Very
few of the States had modern guns, but Utah was especially favored in
this line. During the early organization of the guard she had been
provided with eight 3.2-inch B. & L. rifles, together with limbers,
caisson, harnesses, etc. Thus it was apparent to all who knew anything
of the manner of procedure that the youngest State in the Union would be
called upon to furnish artillery, and so it proved, for, after having
been informed by Senator Frank J. Cannon that this State could man the
guns, the War Department made arrangements for Utah to put two batteries
in the field.

The day following the Governor's call recruiting officers were appointed
to enlist men for the service, the names of those designated to enroll
batterymen being Richard W. Young, Frank A. Grant, George W. Gibbs, Ray
C. Naylor and Orrin R. Grow. These were assigned to different portions
of the State and the work began on the day following. Ethan Allen,
afterwards First Sergeant of Battery A, was the first man to enroll.
Orders were received from Washington naming Fort Douglas as the
rendezvous for the recruits, the message reaching here the day
enlistment began. Briant H. Wells, a Lieutenant in the Second United
States Infantry, who had been stationed here on duty with the National
Guard, was assigned as mustering officer. The recruiting continued with
varied success until May 1st, when the quota was filled. Applications
for enrollment were so plentiful after the news of the call became
generally known that recruiting officers were frequently compelled to
have the men draw lots in order to determine the lucky ones, for that is
the term then used.

May 3rd, camps were pitched on the lower parade ground at Fort Douglas.
It was named Camp Kent in honor of Colonel (now Major-General, retired)
J. Ford Kent, who had commanded the Twenty-fourth United States Infantry
stationed at the fort when hostilities were declared, and which had
marched away but a short time before. As soon as the camp was
established the men began coming in. It was a strange gathering of men
which appeared at the surgeon's door for examination the following
morning. Farmers fresh from the plow, cowboys from the plain, miners
from the mountains, blacksmiths from the forge, students, teachers,
doctors, bookkeepers had assembled to be defenders in common of the
Nation's honor.

On May 4th the officers were selected. The appointments of the Governor
were as follows:

Battery A--Captain, R.W. Young; First Lieutenant, George W. Gibbs;
Second Lieutenants, Ray C. Naylor and Thomas B. Braby. Lieutenant Braby
declined the honor and William C. Webb was selected in his stead.

Battery B--Captain, Frank A. Grant; First Lieutenant, Edgar A.
Wedgewood; Second Lieutenants, John F. Critchlow and Orrin R. Grow.

These selections were regarded as very happy ones. Captain Young is a
graduate of West Point and was at one time a Lieutenant in the Second
United States Artillery; Lieutenant Gibbs was the Major commanding the
battalion of light artillery in the National Guard of Utah; Lieutenant
Naylor was one of the founders of the National Guard and had worked his
way up to a Lieutenant-Colonelcy, while Lieutenant Webb had been for
some time the Captain of Company A, First Infantry N.G.U.

All the officers of Battery B had been identified with the National
Guard. Captain Grant was Colonel of the First Regiment; Lieutenant
Wedgewood was formerly Captain of a company stationed at Provo;
Lieutenant Critchlow was a member of the medical staff, while Lieutenant
Grow was Major of the first battalion of the First Infantry.

No time was lost after the officers had been chosen, as the work of
disciplining the raw force immediately began. Camp Kent was the scene of
bustle and hurry. It was drill, drill, drill, from morning until night,
and "Action Front," "Action Right," "Action Left," "Change Posts,"
"Section left front into line" kept the men moving from reveille until
retreat. All seemed anxious to become proficient in the use of the guns,
and even guard duty--that task ever despised by the soldier--was
performed with a surprising willingness.

On May 9th Lieutenant Wells administered the oath which transformed the
body of citizens into a battalion of soldiers. The work of preparing the
roll was cheerfully done and was accelerated somewhat by the arrival of
a message from the War Department announcing that the Utah Batteries
would be sent to the Philippines. The declaration was received with
satisfaction by some, but others were less enthusiastic as an opinion
prevailed that there would be no fighting in the East, but that Cuba
would furnish the battles of the war. Later developments proved this to
be a mistake, for long after the Spanish had felt the force of American
war machinery at San Juan and El Caney their lost subjects in the
Antipodes were fleeing in terror before the mighty thunder of the Utah
guns at Santa Mesa and Bag Bag.

The batteries left for San Francisco on May 20th. It was an imposing
sight to see the newly recruited soldiers, commanded by Captain Young,
as they marched down the streets to the depot followed by thousands of
citizens who gathered to bid them farewell. Some partings between
relations were exceedingly touching and sad. Perhaps mothers and
sisters, fathers and brothers read in the dim misty vista of the future
the fate to which some of the men were doomed in the furious skirmishes
of Luzon. Cheer after cheer rang out as the train pulled away and the
volunteers responded with vigor, although there were some whose voices
sounded husky as the final greetings were given.

On their arrival at San Francisco the batteries received a royal
welcome, the Red Cross society taking especial pains to make their visit
a pleasant one. Several weeks were consumed in perfecting the
organization and preparing it for foreign service. Lieutenant Wedgewood
and Sergeants Brown and Fehr returned to Utah and recruited 104 men to
complete the organizations to their full strength, leaving Salt Lake
City with them on June 29th. On June 15th the batteries sailed away to
the land across the seas where work of a far more serious nature awaited
them.

The voyage across was not altogether unlike a voyage on any ordinary
vessel, save for the fact that the men were crowded a little closer than
on a first-class passenger boat, and the food was not so elaborate in
character as one would expect to find in a first grade hotel or a
railway dining car. The men kicked in the good natured American way and
continued to eat what was given them and slept as best they could.

A stop was made at Honolulu, where occurred a reception to the Utah men
which marked a bright day in the life of the soldier. The transports
arrived on the night of the 23rd, and at 11 o'clock. The next morning
they went ashore amid the cheers of the Hawaiians, who gave them a
greeting hearty and cordial. Flowers were in profusion and pretty girls
threw bouquets at the tired pilgrims until they felt that they had
indeed found the "Paradise of the Pacific." Judge Kinney, a former
resident of Salt Lake City, headed the reception committee, and there
were elaborate preparations to make the stay one of gladness. The great
sugar works and plantations at Oahu were visited and the points of
interest carefully shown. Then under the shading palms, amid the
fragrance of flowers, with hundreds of pretty girls to wait on them the
men sat down to the banquet. In an atmosphere which breathes poetry and
pleasure; where the soft tropical zephyr kisses the cheek as a mother
does a sleeping infant the choicest fruits were served and substantial
edibles tempted the appetite. Soldiers made love to maidens with dusky
cheeks; American blue eyes told short stories of love to Kanaka brown,
and the Caucasian ladies were not forgotten, for it was a feast of love.
Everywhere was "Aloha, Aloha."

But all things end. The next day saw the ships sail away. With the sweet
fragrance of blossoms still lingering in their nostrils and the
long-to-be-remembered clasp of friendship yet plainly felt they passed
away from the dreamy isle into the oblivion of the Pacific to resume the
diet of beef a la can and coal a la "Colon." Once more was ship soup
staple and tropical sea monotony plentiful.

A few days later the fleet arrived at Wake Island, which General Greene
took possession of in the name of the United States. Five days after
this the Ladrone Islands were sighted and passed.

About the middle of the month the Philippines were sighted and on the
17th the fleet of transports entered the harbor of Manila escorted by
the cruiser "Boston."

The landing was an exceedingly difficult undertaking. The facilities for
taking the guns from the transports were not perfect. The guns were put
ashore in about five feet of water and had to be hauled out by hand, but
the work was accomplished in the usual good natured American fashion,
and when this task was finished men dried their clothes as though
nothing had happened. In landing several amusing incidents occurred.
Many Filipinos, anxious to earn a few "centavos," flocked around the
ships, and not a few of the men hired a native as a sort of a pack horse
to carry them ashore. One two-hundred-pound soldier was unfortunate in
the selection of his human pack horse, for he sat astride the shoulders
of a ninety-pound native until the little fellow broke down and buried
himself and rider in the sad sobbing sea waves to the great amusement of
his comrades and his own disgust. Other occurrences were equally as
ludicrous.

The several days following the landing of the batteries were spent in
giving the men the rest they had earned and needed. No work worthy of
mention was done until the morning of the 29th, when came the first
scent of trouble--of war. From the actions of the officers at early
morning it was plain to be seen that something was going to happen. Two
guns of Battery A were taken over to the trenches which had been built
by the insurgents near the Capuchin Monastery. During the day the
sharpshooters of the Twenty-third United States Infantry and the Spanish
had been doing some desultory firing with little result on either side,
save that the men kept their heads closer to the breastworks, while a
battalion of the Colorado Infantry, under Colonel McCoy, advanced beyond
the old trenches to a point near the monastery, where they threw up a
new line of earthworks. The two guns of Battery A moved to this point
the following morning and took possession of the emplacements already
constructed. On the following morning two guns under Lieutenant Grow of
Battery B were brought over from Camp Dewey and placed in position on
the left. Men from both lines were engaged in erecting gun pits all
along the front. The guns were located about 1000 yards from Fort San
Antonio de Abad, which formed the extreme right of the Spanish line. The
enemy's left and center was protected by a line of intrenchments.
Outpost duty was being performed by a company of the Eighteenth United
States Infantry. The firing, which had been kept up with more or less
vigor, came from the right of the Utah position, which was entirely
unprotected owing to a failure on the part of the insurgents to maintain
their lines between Calle Real and the Pasig road.

During the night of July 30th-31st the excitement began. Heavy small arm
firing was indulged in by the enemy and from his lines came shells at
irregular intervals, none of which did any damage. At this time
Lieutenant Naylor was in the trenches with the two guns of Battery A. At
8 o'clock next morning Lieutenant Gibbs relieved him of the command with
two-gun detachments of fresh men. All day everything was quiet. The
enemy was planning a night attack, as he had no desire to mix with the
American forces in a fair open fight in the broad light of day, but
rather trusted to darkness to accomplish his designs. Everything was
quiet until 11:30 that evening, when the Mausers began singing
venomously from the Spanish lines. Then came the boom of his artillery
and the men in the trenches knew that the time for action had come. The
Tenth Pennsylvania troops replied with their Springfields and the whiz
of the "45's" mingled with the keen "twang" of the Mausers, while the
Third Artillerymen, equipped as regular infantry, took a part in the
altercation. The instructions of the Utah men were not to fire until it
was evident the enemy was making an advance. The cannoneers stood by
their guns awaiting the orders which should make them a part of the
fight. Finally it came. Major Cuthberton of the First California, the
senior officer present, gave the word and then Utah's voice was heard
for the first time during the war. The gunners worked like Trojans and
with shrapnel punched at zero they sent shell after shell into the
Castilian lines. Corporal Charles Varian, with no clothing on save a
pair of trousers, sweating like a man who was working for his life, yet
cool withal, managed his piece like a veteran. Sergeant J.O. Nystrom
gave orders in a collected way that instilled fresh courage into the
hearts of his men. W.W. Riter wore a seraphic smile as he sighted his
gun at the spits of flame on the other side, while Billy Kneass worked
his cannon with the sang froid of a man in a blind waiting for ducks. It
was a warm time and when morning dawned it was ascertained that several
Castilian voices had been added to Choral Society in that land beyond
the river. Utah's men were standing their baptism of fire and proved
themselves soldiers. All the terrible passion of war had supplanted the
first feelings of timidity, and they manipulated their guns with as much
composure as they would have handled the pigskins on the gridiron. But
the ammunition was running short. Fifty-seven shrapnel had been
discharged and the battle was still on. The Pennsylvania men had fired
away nearly all their ammunition, and affairs began to look serious,
when a body of men from Camp Dewey hauling a limber chest after them
dashed from out the gloom. Once more across the intervening space the
shells shrieked and broke the Spanish lines, causing havoc and terror.
The attempt of the "Dons" had proved futile, and after having fought for
two and a half hours they withdrew.

Although other commands had lost men the Utah boys were fortunate in
this that not one of their number was killed and only one slightly
wounded in this engagement.

For several days but little was done by the Utah troops. The men
constructed emplacements for the guns, cut down timber which might have
interfered with good work and awaited orders. In the meantime the
Lieutenants of the batteries were relieving each other from day to day.
The fire from the Spanish lines was kept up in a desultory manner and
was replied to by the infantry in the American lines.

The final engagement on the 13th was short, but the guns of the Utah men
did wonderful execution. In conjunction with Dewey's fleet they tore
holes in the Spanish fort at Malate and helped in forcing the enemy out
of his position on the extreme left.




CHAPTER II.

BARRACK LIFE.


Like all the other organizations which had taken part in the capturing
of Manila, the Utah batteries were without a home when they first
entered the city. Battery A found temporary quarters in a spacious nipa
hut in the Malate district, while Battery B went into barracks in the
Odministracion de Hacienda. Several days later Major Young secured the
Cuartel de Meisic, formerly occupied by a Spanish engineer regiment, and
Battery A was stationed there August 18th. Some days following Battery B
moved into the same building. The Third Artillery occupied the south
half of the Cuartel, and the batteries were domiciled in the east and
west wings of the north half. The Cuartel was a large and stalwart
structure located in the most picturesque part of Manila. South of it
lay the business portion of Manila, with its Escolta, its Plaza de
Cervantes, and its Hotel de Oriente; to the west was the Marcadero
teeming with rustic Filipino maids and redolent with its Oriental odors;
stretching away to the north were the broad rice fields and forests of
bamboo, with the mountains in the distance forming a background. It was
a pleasant home and one which the men appreciated.

During the first few weeks of barrack life the men settled down serene
in the thought that they would soon be speeding homeward. Their duty had
been done and they felt that they were now entitled to the happier
pleasures of Utah. But days passed, and were lengthened into weeks,
weeks passed and were lengthened into months, and still they remained in
the tropics with less hope of returning home than they had at first
entertained. The novelty of their surroundings began to wear off and
everything which the Philippines could afford became decidedly
commonplace. Unable, therefore, to find other entertainments when off
duty, as a pastime the men exchanged reminiscent fairy tales about
their late combat. Wearying of these occupations they often sauntered
out of the Cuartel in bodies in quest of what little mirth they could
get out of the passive and inexplicable natives.

Of course, there were drills and everybody liked them, as they produced
such an excellent opportunity for one to give vent to his feelings after
the drills were over with. Those were happy hours which the men spent in
sweltering under the genial warmth of the southern sun, and learning
with a bitter vengeance the tactics of "dismounted drill." And "double
time," too, was always a pleasant innovation as it generated a bodily
heat to correspond with mental feelings and external influences. Then
there was always an appreciative audience of gaping nut-brown maids and
matrons who took delight in watching the "soldado" go through his
ever-changing evolutions. Yes, those were days which the veteran will
always look back upon with rapture.

At first some trouble was occasioned over the inadequate food supply;
but that difficulty was soon obliterated. The then acting commissary
sergeant was removed and A.L. Williams, familiarly known among his
admirers in the battalion by the euphonious prefixes of "Dad" and
"Judge," was elevated to this position. Under the judicious management
of the Judge a revolution was made in the department and the men waxed
fat from the overflowing cornucopia of the commissary.

In those murky days of Manila were other things which served to offset
the oppressive blazonry of the tropic sun. In order to make the attire
of the soldiers harmonize as much as possible with the requirements of
the climate, light shirts and trousers were provided by the
quartermaster's department. Every week occurred a general inspection, to
which the men were expected to appear housed in this startling white
with polished shoes and flaming brass buckles. A very imposing
appearance they made when lined up on these occasions.

The advent of the soldier vastly accelerated the trade of the native
fruit venders in the vicinity of the Cuartel, and as time wore on this
peculiar product of the Orient increased his sales by the addition of
the deadly "vino," sometimes with rather disastrous results to the
imbiber. That wondrous monument of human ingenuity commonly known as
"army hardtack" formed the standard medium of exchange between the
industrious fruit dealer and his overworked customer. The barred windows
of the Cuartel became the market ground for all the products of Luzon,
and through them many a luscious mango was exchanged for an adamantine
biscuit upon which the soldier had vainly expended all his dental
energy. The natives had full access to the barracks at this time, and
the native washerwoman made the blanco trousers shine iridescently for
inspection by beating them against the sunny side of a boulder and
afterwards pressing them with a fearfully and wonderfully made flatiron.

Hard by the Cuartel were a number of "tiendas," widely known among the
soldiers as "vino stands." The presiding spirit over one of these
establishments was generally a pretty "mestiza," who, in addition to her
natural charms, was blessed with a high-sounding Castilian name. There
were four shops run on the plan, which held pre-eminence both for the
character of the "vino" which they supplied and the bewitching charms of
their owners. The returned volunteer will remember with keen enjoyment
"Juanita," "Juaquina," "Victoriana," and above all "Isabella," the
saintly and virtuous, who was equally as skillful in obtaining the
nimble sixpence as in raising a brood of mestiza children. There was
also "Madre," withered and antiquated, but a born dictator, and through
her superior management she came to be known as the top-sergeant.
Finally there was Ysabel, with a gentle smile upon her pleasant brunette
face, and Estepania, brown-eyed and plump, most beautiful among all the
mestiza belles. Isabella's casa was the place to which the eyes of the
weary soldier turned after a long and fatiguing drill; afterwards it was
the point to which his footsteps inevitably led when he was able to rush
in for a few days from the firing line. The house was large and
spacious, with polished ebony floors and wide windows through which the
balmy zephyrs blew and kissed the heated brow of the tired fighter.
Beautiful creepers twisted their way up the wall and stole in at the
extensive balcony to catch a taste of the pleasures within; the
broadleafed banana palm surrounded the casa and broke the power of the
blazing tropic sun. It was, indeed, the one spot in all the East which
made the home-loving Utahns feel at home. When away all his secret
longings were centered upon that place and its attractions, and his
mouth yearned for a renewed acquaintance with the delicate omelets
fashioned by the dainty fingers of Pania and the crab brought from the
bay by the ubiquitous Peek-a-boo. His mind reverted with gratitude to
the anxious solicitations of "Madre" when she learned that he was
suffering from a headache and he acutely remembered the healing balm
which she applied to his fevered brow. He knew, too, that should he be
struck down in death by the bullet of the enemy, what tears of sympathy
would be shed at the news of his misfortune.

[Illustration: A FAMILIAR SCENE.]

The one source of worriment about the Isabella mansion was the fact that
the thirsty soldiers were frequently given an over supply of the deadly
vino. Such an occurrence was attended with dire results; but as the
motherly "Madre" was blessed with an abundant store of remedies, under
her care the victim was soon restored to his mental equilibrium. All
soldiers seem gifted with special powers to spend money and as a
consequence few of them could command the attention of a penny bootblack
twenty-four hours after being paid, but this weakness had no weight with
the kindly old dame who carried a large credit roll and could refuse
nothing to a Utah soldado. So Isabella's mansion forms a part of the war
history of the Utah batteries; and it must be remembered with other and
more stirring scenes; for when the thoughts of the Utah soldier stray to
the domicile of the Isabella family they are mingled with happy
reminiscences and strange memories and tragic sights.

       *       *       *       *       *

One hundred and four weary and footsore recruits arrived in the Cuartel
on the 28th of August and deposited their blankets and all other
portable property on the greensward. They had been waiting out in the
bay four days and had finally reached the Cuartel after having made a
complete circuit of the city. Sergeant Arthur W. Brown piloted the new
batch of volunteers to their home, and ever since the redoubtable
Sergeant has borne a reputation, as a file leader, which would make a
Mexican burro grow green-eyed with envy.

Here it might be stated that after watching the fleet of transports,
which conveyed the Utah batteries, sail out of the rugged Golden Gate
into the broad Pacific, Lieutenant E.A. Wedgewood and Sergeants Arthur
W. Brown and L.N. Fehr turned toward Utah bent on the mission of
securing 104 recruits, which would give each battery its full quota of
173. Volunteers were numerous but the work of enlisting covered a period
of nine days. Recruits were obtained from all points in the State but
the majority came from Salt Lake City. On the 28th of June the full
number had been enrolled and the following day the small body of men
left for San Francisco, after being accorded a warm demonstration at the
depot. At Oakland they remained all night of the 30th and the following
morning they marched to Camp Merritt, from which place they were removed
to the Presidio two days later.

Late in June Lieutenant Wedgewood was taken ill with typhoid fever but
remained with the men until July 6th, when he was taken to the Lane
hospital and Lieutenant Diss of the California Heavy Artillery was
placed temporarily in charge of the recruits. Orders were for the Utah
contingent to sail on the transport "Rio de Janeiro," and as the South
Dakota Infantry was the only organization on the vessel Lieutenant
Foster of that regiment was given command of the men.

The voyage was uneventful save that the soldiers were ill-treated by
Lieutenant Foster, who succeeded in gaining for himself the eternal
hatred of the men under his charge. As the recruits were then
unacquainted with military practices, many expressions of disgust being
made in an unguarded way, reached the ears of the worthy Lieutenant, who
heaped still greater indignities upon the men by way of retaliation.

At Honolulu W.A. Kinney, the large plantation owner, entertained the
Utahns during their brief stay in that city.

The "Rio de Janeiro" arrived in Manila Bay on the 24th of August, but it
was four days later before the recruits set foot on the soil of Luzon
and made their phenomenal march up the streets of Manila to Plaza de
Felipe II, where they greeted their comrades.

Lieutenant Wedgewood, having recovered from his fever, arrived October
4th on the "Scandia," which left San Francisco on August 27th.

During the long dreary days following the arrival of the recruits their
life was not entirely joyous. From sunrise to sunset they were forced to
listen to the blood-curdling tales which their companions told of the
late conflict with the "Dons." At first they hearkened to them with
respectful attention. They never doubted the truth of these glowing
fairy stories. They revered these self-lauding heroes as a species of
immortal beings. In return for this tributary deference they were
treated with contempt. The veteran called them "rookies," and whenever
one of them attempted to soar he was promptly and sternly reminded of
his inferiority and kindly invited to get off the pedestal upon which he
had so unwittingly placed himself while one of his superiors proceeded
to relate a harrowing tale of blood and thunder and rain down in the
trenches. Every bit of rainy weather or glorious sunset reminded the
Malate hero of something he had seen in the trenches and at once he
began to dilate upon it with great attention to details and a lofty air
of his own importance.

So it went on. The recruits vainly sought for relief. He tried to stem
the tide of persecution by relating stories of his own. But as soon as
he made such an attempt he was immediately "bawled out" and his
tormentors proceeded with a fresh tirade. Finally one of the groaning
victims hit upon a happy plan, and after it was carried out it
effectually stopped the torture. When in the future the mendacious
veteran essayed to array himself in a cloud of glory by narrating
legends of personal prowess, he was unceremoniously suppressed by the
rookies, who sang:

   It may be so; I do not know,
   But it sounds to me like a lie.

Instantly upon the starting of this little hymn it was taken up by every
soldier in the barracks and the unlucky veteran, crestfallen and beaten,
was only too glad to retire into seclusion.

       *       *       *       *       *

During those five months in which the soldier was learning the
peculiarities of Oriental life and sweltering under the rays of the
Southern sun, he adopted any means of causing the speedy destruction of
time. After the singularities of his new surroundings had ceased to be
uncommon he began to look about himself in search of other amusement.
Naturally a person who adapts himself easily to his environments, he
took up with the games of the Filipinos, and, as a consequence, soon
after the appearance of the American as a prominent figure on the
streets of Manila, it was no unusual occurrence to behold the huge,
good-natured Yankee engaged in friendly sport with the diminutive and
fiery Tagalan.

As cock-fighting is the national game of the native the soldier seized
upon this diversion with an enthusiasm that was truly remarkable. The
slender and wiry game cock was in great demand. The feathered pugilist
became the hero of the hour. The price of "pollos" jumped above par two
or three times over. On the shady side of every street could be seen
little knots of men eagerly awaiting the outcome of a battle in which
these kings among all the fowl tribe were engaged. And the victory was
not decided without great loss, for frequently the champion proclaimed
himself conqueror by mounting the gory body of his late enemy and
crowing with great vigor. Men bet on their favorites with as much fervor
as an ardent proselyte of Mohammed utters praises to his Maker from the
housetop at sunrise.

But even this pastime was too tame for the restless nature which
constantly pined for the more exciting fun of America. So the chicken
stock suddenly declined in value, and that of the swine took a
corresponding rise, when there was talk of organizing a football
association. This plan, however, lost its popularity after several
practices on the "Gridiron"--the climate of Luzon had its drawbacks when
it came to punting the pigskin. The requirements for a good football
game are a temperature of 6 degrees below zero, and a field covered with
a four-inch layer of snow and a corresponding thickness of soft mud
underneath. As the Philippines are sadly deficient in the first two
articles, it was decided to drop "Rugby" in favor of baseball.

Throughout the Eighth Army Corps this proposition was received with
great warmth. Every organization had its team. Some influential men of
Manila offered inducements to the winning nine; the American Commercial
Company agreed to present a silver cup to the team which could score the
most points. Arrangements were made for matches, and rival teams soon
met on the diamond at the Lunetta. Utah was not to be outdone even in
baseball; any man who had ever played ball or looked at a diamond was
invited to join the team, and after this liberal request, it took no
great time for the battalion to put a pretty good organization into the
field. Soon the husky farmers from Utah were pitted against the powerful
"pumpkin rollers" from Nebraska, and the sturdy Pennsylvanians fought
for honors with the Wyoming cowboys.

Those were pleasant hours when the sons of America met under the tropic
sky on a foreign soil and exchanged friendly greeting in their national
game. Not a follower of the "Stars and Stripes" was there but felt
happier and prouder after such a day. Home seemed nearer by half than it
ever had before. And the natives, too, came in for a share of the
rejoicing; they liked to see the "Grande Americano" perform his antics
with the ball; they, too, gathered in knots and talked and gesticulated
and laughed and cheered. The irrepressible small boy was everywhere
present, with his sarsaparilla, his peanuts and his slabs of cocoanut
candy. There were those who made his trade profitable and those who
preferred something of a more fiery nature. That also could be obtained
for the asking.

So the games went on by the side of the great swelling sea, and the roll
of the surf mingled with the merry tones of the players. Battles were
fought and fields were won on the diamond and Utah carried the trophy
away to America.

       *       *       *       *       *

While there were some things which excited the curiosity, others which
aroused the attention, and still others which seemed to rivet men's
minds for a short time on certain subjects, yet they all paled into
insignificance before the magic of that one word "Mail!"

On a quiet sultry day, when all nature except the sun seemed to be
taking a rest and when nothing but the bugle call for dinner could prove
that a spark of life remained in the barracks, the announcement that
mail had arrived would transform that peaceful quiet building into an
Eastern bazar, with all of its accessions. At the mention of that word
the stolid sentry, pacing his beat with languid steps, instantly
quickened into life; the motionless somnolent forms lying on the canvas
cots sprang from their recumbent positions, strangely wide awake; the
groups of men engaged in a social game of cards, instantly scattered
for that new field of interest. The First Sergeant's office became a
scene of the greatest activity. An eager, excited crowd gathered around;
cheeks and noses were pressed against the iron grating, while the ear
listened intently for familiar names. Happy was he who received a goodly
supply.

[Illustration: "OLD GUARD FATIGUE" AT THE CUARTEL.]

There were those who turned away crestfallen and disappointed, there
were others who remained behind and hungrily eyed their more fortunate
comrades, as they knew they had no loved ones to write to them. When the
mail had been distributed the barracks again relapsed into silence, but
it was a wide awake silence, not a sultry, oppressive one. Then was
reading of letters which told of love and friendship and hope; then were
familiar scenes brought before the imagination to renew acquaintances
which had begun to grow dim; then were sighs heard for dear home and
mother. Newspapers and magazines were not unpopular. The letters read,
then the papers were devoured. Long articles, short articles,
advertisements and pictures were consumed with equal eagerness, and when
every visible portion had been absorbed they were held up to the light
to see if they contained anything on the inside. Such was mail day in
Manila, and the story proceeds.

In the early days of barrack life, men talked of returning home to
celebrate Thanksgiving, but after October had begun to decline it became
evident that these fond hopes were not to be realized.

Then the inventive Yankee proceeded to devise means to give thanks in
the good old fashioned way in spite of climate and strange country. The
Luzon turkey in all respects does not compare favorably with his
American cousin, yet he is "turkey," and that goes a great way when it
comes to celebrating Thanksgiving.

It was upon this peculiar species of the feathered race that the
batterymen fastened their attentions. Turkeys were secured, and they
served as a nucleus about which all preparations centered. Several weeks
prior to the gala day most elaborate arrangements were made. The
soldiers gathered in knots and discussed the coming event. It had a
particular interest with them as they anticipated something more
palatable than the ordinary "hardtack and slum-gullion." Nor were their
expectations disappointed, for, when the day came in all its glory, the
commissary had proved itself equal to the occasion. All the powers of
the culinary art had been brought to bear upon the leathery tendons of
this turkey of the East. It had been fried and flayed until the very air
of the barracks became aromatic with its savor. Even the hungry natives
scented the perfumed air and gathered at the entrances to inspect the
delicacies more closely.

At length the tables were prepared and the ravenous warriors seated
themselves. Then were the victuals attacked with vigor; the enemy
brought forth all his fighting force; he assaulted the front with deadly
effect; simultaneously he attacked the flank and the rear; he cut, he
hacked, he slashed, he dissected and tore, until there was nothing left
of his victim but the skeleton, and even this he eyed ravenously. Of
course there were pies and cakes and cranberries and fruits and greens
and vegetables, and they, too, suffered. Of the squash family there were
not a few, the favorite pumpkin was wanting, but then the lack of it had
been long since supplied by the desiccated potato, and the consumer felt
no secret pangs at its absence. Thus Thanksgiving passed on and
Christmas came with its bevy of holiday boxes, and its "Peace on earth
good will to men;" but while the American was still thinking of the
light of peace, there came the low rumbling of impending gloom; his ears
were startled by the distant thunder of the voice of war; he knew it to
be the opening peal of the awakening insurrection and his attention
turned to the more serious matter of the imminent conflict. A more
powerful enemy than his late foe menaced him from all sides.




CHAPTER III.

THE INSURRECTION.


The report of a rifle rang down the quiet Santa Mesa hill on the night
of February 4th. As the flash of the gun died away in the gloom a dusky
warrior fell in death and the spark of an insurrection kindled into
flame. Almost instantly the belligerent Tagalans rushed down upon the
American outposts; the United States forces from Caloocan to Malate
swung into line, and the sturdy Anglo-Saxon and the fiery Malay were
matched in combat.

The violent clash caused no look of surprise to flutter across the faces
of the American soldiers; all knew that the outbreak was coming, all had
waited with expectant excitement for the impending conflict. To the
intoxicated native victory against the Spanish seemed too certain to be
wrested from him by the conquering American; he had long smarted under
the goading reflection that "the wreath of the conquerer" had been
snatched away at the moment when it seemed almost within his grasp. This
bitter knowledge irritated and maddened him, until he only awaited an
opportunity to spring at the throat of his imaginary foe and wrench from
him what he considered his own. He remembered the long years of
wretchedness under Spanish tyranny and oppression. He suspected that his
new masters would prove even more overbearing than his late persecutors.
He had not forgotten the daring rush for liberty which his ancestors had
made. Their blood coursed through his veins and he determined that he
would not relinquish the struggle without one last bold dash for the
coveted goal.

It was not alone a love for liberty which spurred onward the dark horde
which followed the red banner of Aguinaldo. Since 1896 they had striven
with their ancient enemy, with the hope that they might tear from him
all his wealth. Their leader had with subtle diplomacy urged on his wary
braves with the thought that when they battered down the walls of Manila
all that it contained would be theirs to loot and ravage. They loved
liberty, but they loved the gold which it would bring still more. So
they looked with hungry eyes when they saw the Americano enter the city
of their dreams and close the gate against the black hosts who sought
entrance to plunder and steal.

During the few months preceding the outbreak the Filipinos had become
less friendly to their late allies. "La Independencia," the official
organ of the insurgents, frequently came out with loud denunciations
against the Americans and called the sullen natives to action against
the hated usurpers. It was not an uncommon occurrence to see the walls
of public buildings patched over with "proclamos," signed by Aguinaldo,
almost openly declaring war against the Americans and asserting the
rights of the Tagalans to their independence.

The fourteen blockhouses which had been the Spanish line of defense had
been allowed to fall into the hands of the Filipinos, who converted them
into a strong offensive and defensive work. When by chance an American
strayed beyond these fortifications, the attitude of the native sentries
was often violent and abusive. Eventually no soldiers were permitted to
go outside of the territory bounded by our outposts, and the Malay line
of muskets tightened around the city like the arm of a colossal dragon.
Repeatedly there were war alarms, and for several days the men not on
duty were kept in barracks. At times the Tagalans at the pumping station
shut off the water supply merely as an insolent challenge and an
indication of what they were able to do. On certain parts of the line
the Filipinos were seen building new intrenchments and reinforcing the
old ones.

For several weeks natives had been concentrating around the Santa Mesa,
and Lieutenant Webb was sent out to the Nebraska camp with the left
platoon of Battery A to strengthen the Nebraska position. The Santa Mesa
road was looked upon by the multitude of Aguinaldo as the natural
gateway to Manila. It was at the San Juan Del Monte bridge that they
had sought in vain to pound their way into the Spanish lines on many a
desperate battle night. One of the Utah guns occupied the very gun pit
which had been used by the Castilians as a defense from which their
cannon barked back defiance to the onrushing fanatical hordes.

Often there were wrangles between Colonel Stotsenberg and the Tagalan
officers regarding the line of outposts which the native forces should
occupy. Several times the Colonel averted hostilities by a judicious
yielding to minor points. Ultimately at the San Juan bridge a stalwart
American sentry and a diminutive Tagalan paced in parallel lines. The
Filipinos seemed anxious to aggravate the Americans into an act of
hostility, and rigorous orders were issued to prevent such an
occurrence. Night after night the native warriors clustered about one
end of the bridge and uttered curses at the silent Nebraskan outpost.
Before the outbreak actually took place several times our sentries were
forced back by a howling mob of drunken Malays.

One native officer was particularly violent. Not a night passed but that
he gathered a crowd of inebriated Tagalans and tramped down to the
bridge for the purpose of scoffing and hurling vile epithets at the
taciturn American posted there. They were encouraged by the lenient and
apparently submissive attitude of the Americans whom they had begun to
look upon as arrant cowards, who could be wheedled and whipped about as
they chose.

On the night when the signal shot sang out in the darkness and the
battle came, the same haughty officer was coming down towards the
American line to repeat his abusive conduct, when the sharp voice of the
sentry rang out as a warning to halt. He persistently advanced and at
the same time launched some vehement Tagalan curses at the outpost. The
next instant he lay dead with a bullet through his heart; the report
startled the still night air and an insurrection was born.

All that night the thunders of the united American forces in action were
wafted to the Cuartel. The natives were so close that some of the
bullets pattered against the walls of the building and some even struck
the Hotel De Oriente, nearer town. When the commissary wagons probed
their way out to the belligerent front they were fired upon from the
houses lining the streets. Every nipa hut in which a private family
lived became an arsenal.

The trouble had been anticipated and every officer knew what portion he
was expected to defend. Ten minutes after the news arrived in the
Cuartel, the heavy guns of Utah rumbled over the streets to different
parts of the field.

Those under Major Grant rushed out into the night and were instantly
under a vigorous fire near the woods of Caloocan. Captain Wedgewood
disappeared in the blackness and took up the appointed position on the
Balic Balic road near Sampaloe cemetery. The guns under Lieutenant
Seaman dashed out of the barracks and a few moments later their deep
bass was added to the Satanic roar. On McLeod's hill surrounded by the
Nebraskans two guns under Lieutenant Webb menaced the plain below.

At Santa Mesa the fight began. Three minutes after the opening flash the
Nebraskan camp was deserted. As the outposts slowly returned the
regiment swept onward to the fray, and soon the angry rattle of the
"Long Toms" answered back the viperous "ping" of the Mauser.

The sound of the first shot had hardly ceased echoing upon the hill when
the Tagalans, jubilant, confident, flew for the bridge; their onrush was
met with a volley from the Nebraskans. Then from Caloocan and Sampaloe
the din of multitudinous musketry fired in unison, waved over the hill;
then the awful thunder of the guns of the fleet pulverized the enemy's
bulwarks at Malate swelled over the plain. Occasionally a lull came in
the fight and then as if gathering strength by inaction the tumult broke
forth with increased fury. In the darkness it was impossible for the
Utah guns to accomplish anything, as the location of the infantry could
not be exactly distinguished. So all night the men tugged and toiled to
get the pieces in position, that they might take part in the encounter
at dawn. The fifth section gun held a commanding position on the right
and the sixth section was stationed directly in front of McLeod's house,
from which point it could sweep the enemy's line from Blockhouse No. 7
on the north to the Catholic convent on the south.

Just as the first streaks of dawn dappled the east, the two big guns
belched over the plain and the fight began. During the night the
relative positions of the opposing forces had not been changed. The
maddened Filipinos made a renewed attempt to cross the bridge and
penetrate the Nebraska line, that they might gain their coveted
goal--the city of their dreams. The aim of the two guns was concentrated
upon this point. Twice the Tagalans with frenzied courage charged up the
bridge, only to be torn to pieces by the shrieking shells and the deadly
bullets. With desperate energy they hauled an artillery piece into
position on the bridge, but this was demolished by a single shell from
one of our guns.

The position of the artillery became perilous; the insurgents centered a
galling fire upon the big guns, with the hope of ridding themselves of
this new terror. The leaden missiles rained from three points,
Blockhouse No. 7, the bridge and the convent. Every time one of the
cannon roared over the hill, she raised a vicious hail of bullets from
the enemy. Three minutes after the conflict began Corporal John G. Young
received a fatal wound in the lungs. Almost immediately after Private
Wilhelm I. Goodman fell dead with a bullet through his brain.

Instantly men rushed in to fill their places, but the position of the
gun had become so dangerous that Lieutenant Webb ordered it removed to a
more sheltered point, at the north of the house. In the face of a heavy
fire the men lifted the piece out of the pit and rolled it to the
station designated. This ended the casualty list of the artillery for
that day. Both guns now shelled the enemy at Blockhouse No. 7 and the
San Juan Del Monte Church, until the two guns under Lieutenant Gibbs
came up. The skilled aim of the two gunners and the superb courage of
Lieutenant Webb and Sergeants Fisher and Robinson were greatly
commended.

Shortly before 11 o'clock two Nordenfelt guns under Lieutenant Gibbs
arrived at the hill and under the orders of Colonel Smith of the
Tennesseeans advanced up the Santa Mesa road. The Tagalans were still in
strong force in the woods to the right of the road, and, as the two guns
moved forward, they received a pelting fire from this locality.

The guns dashed up the road and swung into action on the bridge. The
forces then began an advance up the road, running twenty and thirty
yards at a time, supported by the infantry from Tennessee. After a half
hour of sharp fighting the Tagalans fled before the cannister and
shrapnel of the big guns and the bullets of the Tennesseeans, and thus
the hills as far as the Deposito were won. Meanwhile, a battalion of
Tennesseeans had deployed out to the left and taken the Deposito, and
the two guns were moved to this point.

The Tennesseans left the Nebraskans in charge of the Deposito and
disappeared off to the right. Late that night Lieutenant Webb and the
fatigued warriors of Santa Mesa joined Lieutenant Gibbs at the Deposito,
where they bivouacked with the prospect on the morrow of an advance upon
the pumping station, four miles beyond.

The movement upon the pumping station was not easily accomplished; there
were several sharp skirmishes on the way. Though the power of the
insurgents seemed to have been broken on the previous day, there were
some in whom the spirit of resistance was not entirely extinguished and
they contested the march of the Americans with vigor. When the move was
made on the morning of the 6th the artillery was under the personal
command of Major Young. A straggling line of infantry deployed on either
side of the road and with the artillery in the rear the forward movement
began. Scarcely half a mile from the Deposito the moving column
encountered a small body of Tagalans, who opened fire. Once more the
angry guns pealed forth in menacing thunder and the terror-stricken
natives retreated for the kind shelter of the bamboo thickets beyond.
Two similar skirmishes happened farther up the road. About a mile and a
half from the Deposito the mutilated body of Dr. Harry A. Young was
found lying by the side of a ventilator. Some distance back the body of
his horse had been discovered. Major Young was the first to locate this
gory evidence, which mutely told the tragic story of the end of Dr.
Young. All the clothing had been rent from the body, a bullet hole was
in his forehead, and a bolo wound from the elbow of the left arm to the
waist told the tragic story of how he died. The supposition is that the
Doctor was surprised on his way to the Deposito, where he had an
appointment with Major Young, and took the wrong road, which led him to
a grim death in the Tagalan territory. A few minutes later, while the
body was being conveyed to Manila, the Major calmly commanded his men in
a rush with the enemy, in which eighty of them were killed. This
exhibition of splendid courage was ever after an inspiration to the
Utahn when he felt like being disheartened.

Gradually the uncoiled infantry line pushed back the recalcitrant
natives, and late in the morning the heights above the beautiful
Mariquina valley were reached. Here the artillery was placed in
position, and, with the Mariquina Church steeple as a target, the town
was bombarded. Now and then a shuddering shrapnel was sent shrieking
after fugitive bands of Tagalans, who made all haste for the protecting
shelter of the mountain on the opposite side of the valley.

From that place they were content to look with dismay upon the
death-dealing monsters which frowned from the hill above the bulwarks.

When the first platoon of Battery A, under Captain Wedgewood, sped out
into the gloom on the night of the 4th it took up a position in the
Balic Balic road near the Cemetario de Sampaloe. All night long the two
guns were under a straggling fire from the Filipinos, who at this place
held Blockhouse No. 5, about 300 yards to our front, and a diminutive
stone church which was located off to the right of our position. The
section two gun was placed inside the Cemetario, but that of section
one remained outside, where it was exposed to the enemy's fire.

At 3 a.m. from two points the Malays centered a vicious fusilade upon
the artillery, which remained inactive owing to the obscurity of the
Tagalan line of defense. No. 1 gun was moved back about 100 yards to a
more sheltered station by the cemetery. Just as the first streaks of
dawn appeared in the east the two guns blazed toward the blockhouse and
the small church, in which were a large number of natives.
Simultaneously the Colorado infantry swung into position and with a
withering fire slowly advanced upon the enemy. Several well-directed
shells sent the Filipinos flying from the blockhouse and a few more
accurately trained shots annihilated the little church. As the Tagalans
moved from their cover they fell many deep before the blasting volleys
of the invincible Coloradoans.

As the natives fled from the church, the artillery turned its attention
to Blockhouse No. 4, 1700 yards distant, and while the South Dakotans
made a wonderful charge they demolished this wooden bulwark. Next the
big guns were ordered to shatter Blockhouse No. 6, but before they could
be brought into play against this point the insurgents had disappeared
into the woods with the swift-moving Colorado infantrymen hard on their
track. On the 6th the platoon was moved to a position left of Blockhouse
No. 7. On this part of the line it remained until March 23rd, when it
was ordered to Caloocan to take part in the fierce engagement at that
point when the whole line charged the enemy's works on March 25th.

The damage inflicted on the natives of Sampaloe was very considerable.
Over a hundred bodies were buried there and in many a battered form
could be seen that ripping course of a shrapnel. General Hale personally
praised the work of Sergeants Emil Johnson and W.E. Kneass, who were in
immediate charge of the two rifles.

The guns of Battery B took a position on the left of the line to the
south of Caloocan on the night of the war alarm. Second Lieutenant
Seaman went out on the Caloocan road with one 3.2 gun. Major Grant left
the Cuartel with three 3.2-inch guns, and after leaving one at Bilibid
Prison took the remaining two up the rugged Bulum Bugan road as far as
Lazaro Hospital. Emplacements were made under a spattering fire from the
enemy at this point, facing the Chinese Hospital and the Binondo
Cemetery, in both of which places the Tagalans were strongly lodged.
Only an occasional shot blazed towards the enemy during the night, but
from a commanding position the artillery fire began at dawn with
destructive and terrifying results. Besides driving the
sturdily-intrenched Tagalans back, the Utah attack entirely covered the
simultaneous advance of the Tenth Pennsylvania and South Dakota
infantry.

The advance of the slowly-moving regiment was irresistable and the
natives fell back from their position after a stubborn fight. All that
day the Malay resisted the American advance with fanatical frenzy. The
artillery moved forward at the same moment, but many times was delayed
by burning huts. After an advance of about 400 yards they again joined
the infantry line, but they had arrived at a conspicuous and dangerous
position on the road, where for thirty minutes they fought desperately
in the open under a heavy fire from the Filipino intrenchments. It was
here that Major Bell of General McArthur's staff rode up and requested
Major Grant to move up beyond the Chinese Hospital, where the Tagalans
in a fierce engagement were inflicting heavy damage on the infantry.
Almost at the same moment Colonel Wallace sent word that a company of
the Tenth Pennsylvanians had been cut off to the left, and Lieutenant
Critchlow was sent with one gun up the Leco road to its assistance. The
remaining guns tore the woods in front of the advancing infantry and
cleared the way for the Pennsylvanians and South Dakotans, so that the
right wing advanced at this point almost without a casualty. Still
towards Caloocan the artillery advanced with the musketeers, and beyond
the Cemetery Church the big guns shelled the woods to the left of La
Loma in front of the advancing Third United States Artillery (infantry)
and Twentieth Kansas. Just when the Tagalans were fleeing, bleak with
terror, from the artillery shells; when Colonel Funston, like a young
Jove, was pounding his way irresistibly up from the left, and when
everything looked auspicious for an easy dash into Caloocan, word came
from General MacArthur that the firing should cease. The spires of
Caloocan were then almost in view, and there is an opinion that had
General MacArthur not feared that the line would grow too thin by a
further advance Funston would have taken Caloocan that night, with many
railway cars and many supplies, and with the saving of many lives which
went out on the next advance when the Filipinos had had time to bulwark
themselves behind their wonderful intrenchments.

On the same day the guns were moved to a position close to La Loma
Church. Later two Nordenfelt guns arrived, one of Battery A, and were
stationed first at Blockhouse No. 3 and afterwards east of La Loma
Church and in front of the left battalion of the South Dakota infantry.
These were commanded by Lieutenant Critchlow.

Meanwhile Lieutenant Seaman withstood a destructive fire on the Caloocan
road. Early in the fight he was reinforced at the suggestion of the
division commander by the addition of another gun. Major Young took
personal command of the Nordenfelt which arrived there late that night.
Frequently in the encounter the natives rushed up to within 150 yards of
our position, from which they went reeling back before the awful thunder
of the big guns. At times the powder-begrimed Utahns were in advance of
the main line, carrying death into the very teeth of the foe. So fierce
was the conflict that Major Young had the gun manipulated in short
reliefs, and this shortened the casualty list of our organization.
Corporal Wardlaw and Private Peter Anderson sustained wounds while
serving their pieces in this manner. The natives trained two big guns on
our position and fired fifteen ineffective shots from them. Next day the
two guns supported the Kansas troops in their advance upon the Filipino
intrenchments and Blockhouse No. 1. As the swift-moving column charged
the enemy's line the two rifles tore great gaps into this wooden
structure and plowed furrows into the wonderfully-constructed
earthworks. When the insurgents had fled before the deadly volleys of
the Kansans one gun was stationed at the blockhouse and the other at the
Binondo Cemetery. Here they remained until February 10th, when they took
part in the demonstration against Caloocan.

The next three days Major Grant's three guns did nothing except to fire
occasionally at some enthusiastic Filipino sharpshooters. On the 11th a
general advance was made by the Montana and the Kansas infantry and the
Third United States Artillery. The artillery force consisted of two guns
under Lieutenant Seaman on the hill to the left, two guns under
Lieutenant Fleming of the Sixth United States Artillery on the railroad,
Lieutenant Critchlow with two Nordenfelts at Blockhouse No. 2, and Grant
with three 3.2-inch B. and L. rifles at La Loma Church. The prearranged
signal for the attack was to be a bombardment by the navy accompanied by
a similar action by Major Young's artillery force. The big guns pounded
shell against the native defenses, and sent shrapnel singing into the
woods surrounding the town, and under the somewhat ineffectual, but
loudly-thundering labors of the fleet the infantry column hurried
forward, and the Tagalans gradually swayed back. As the enemy retreated
the aim of the guns was directed higher and several of these iron
messengers went crashing into the town. Some remarkably good work was
performed by our gunners on this day. It is said that a small body of
Filipinos could be seen reinforcing the intrenchments at the gate of the
Caloocan Cemetery. A Utah gunner saw this, and turned his piece on the
gate and shortly after a shell shuddered through the air on its
2600-yard journey. When the smoke cleared away, gate, Filipinos and war
weapons strewed the ground for many yards.

Major Bell with a flanking column of Montanas deployed through a ravine
on the right. Suddenly a long, rope-like column of natives whipped out
of the fringe of the woods and quickly coiled around the company. Major
Young saw the predicament in which the Americans were placed, and soon
the murderous shells fell in the midst of the column, which broke into
fragments and disappeared the way it had come. The next day Major Bell
was lavish in his praise of the batteries, and several British officers
who were watching the progress of the fight complimented the gunners on
their expert and effective gunnery.

During the attack on Caloocan Lieutenant Seaman followed with the
infantry as far as the flames from the burning houses would permit and
pulled the gun through Caloocan to a position on the Kansas line. On the
11th guns were moved to a position on a hillside near the residence of
Mr. Higgins near Caloocan at a place where he commanded the causeway
between Caloocan and Malabon. At this point the two guns were joined by
a platoon of the Sixth Artillery and a 3.6 mortar under Corporal Boshard
of Battery B.

[Illustration: LIEUT. GIBBS' SECTION AT FT. MACARTHUR.]

At this time Utah soldiers on different parts of the line manned
thirty-two pieces of artillery, including 3.2-inch B.L. rifles,
Hotchkiss revolving cannon, Hotchkiss mountain guns, Maxim Nordenfelts
captured from the Spanish, Mortars, Colt's rapid-fire (Browning's) gun,
a navy field piece, navy six-pounder and Gatling guns of various
calibers.

After Caloocan was taken possession of by the troops scarcely any
fighting was indulged in until March 25th, when an advance was made.
Except for occasional incursions into the enemy's territory for the
purpose of driving back harassing sharpshooters there was a practical
cessation of hostilities at the waterworks. At this time the line over
which our guns were stationed extended from Malabon to Mariquina. At
Caloocan a severe engagement occurred on the 23rd of February. A large
force of insurgents came rushing down from the hill towards our outposts
and finally established themselves within 150 yards of the American
lines. It was during this period that some of them were able to
penetrate the American position and steal their way into Manila to take
part in the burning of the Tondo district. This band was under the
leadership of a bold and gallant chief named Zandico. While Tondo was
disappearing in flames and sharp hand-to-hand skirmishes were taking
place between these Filipino desperadoes and the American police a
furious altercation was going on between the darkly-outlined bulwarks of
the two armies. During this attack sixty men of the Kansas and Montana
regiments alone were killed and wounded.

The work of the sharpshooters showed the watchful alertness of the
enemy. Whenever one of these riflemen espied a piece of American anatomy
there was a report and a still messenger of death went skimming through
the air. Frequently one of the large guns had to be employed to repress
the zeal of one of these ubiquitous Malays. While repairing a breach in
the gun pit Lieutenant Seaman received a wound in the leg, Corporal
Southers was shot in the hip and Private Hill sustained a serious wound
in the back.

About this time existed as remarkable a truce as was ever patched up
between belligerent forces. Some Filipino statesmen came down from
Malabon to see Aguinaldo, and as they carried a flag of truce firing
from our side ceased. The natives signified their desire to talk and
Colonel Funston and Major Young went half way to meet them. The
Tagalans then made known their proposition, which was that there should
be no firing between the two forces at that point for a period of ten
days. Colonel Funston assented. This was directly in front of the Kansas
line. The insurgents rigidly adhered to their promise, and while the
Springfields and Mausers were angrily barking in the vicinity of the
railroad track no messenger of war sped across the space in front of the
Kansans.

       *       *       *       *       *

The four guns under Lieutenant Gibbs and Webb lifted to a commanding
position on the hill above the waterworks, menaced the valley below.
Frequently they boomed from the mountains as a warning to the curious
natives down on the wide plain of the San Mateo. The encounters which
took place between the Americans and the Tagals at this place are
illustrative of the peculiar mode of warfare carried on by the natives.
Not a few times our forces made invasions in the enemy's country at
Mariquina under the protection of the guns and drove his army into the
foothills on the opposite side of the valley, only to find him back in
his old position before nightfall with his camp fires piercing the gloom
of the valley as darkness settled in.

These successive defeats seemed to have no power in dampening the ardor
of the ducky warriors of the plains. They continued to make invasions on
the American territory, and frequently waylaid belated American troops.
Up to March 25th the infantry force was not sufficiently large to hold
the country which had been taken. Four times the town of Mariquina was
captured in this style. Finally, by some peculiar decision of fate, a
battalion of Coloradoans descended into the valley and after dislodging
the enemy set fire to the hideous nipa huts. Thereafter fewer skirmishes
occurred in this locality. The white and shining church steeple arose
above the blackened ruins as a ghostly monument of the work of war.

About four days after the occupancy of the waterworks by the American
troops Colonel Stotsenberg with a small body of the infantry scoured the
Mariquina plain, but though he met with some heated skirmishes and
drove the enemy back, there was no visible results from his excursion.
The artillery was first used in an advance on February 17th, when the
two Nordenfelt guns were taken down the Mariquina road by Lieutenant
Gibbs. None of the Utah men were hurt on this occasion, although the
natives fought stubbornly at short range and several men and officers of
the Nebraska regiment were wounded. Meanwhile General Montenegro, known
as one of the fiercest Filipino chiefs, had congregated his forces in
the woods southwest of the pumping station towards Pasig Lake and
Cainta. A plan was formed for surrounding the insurgents and the
Nebraska and Washington infantry and the two Maxim Nordenfelts took part
in the engagement. The artillery worked with the Nebraskans and shelled
the woods. Then there was a simultaneous advance from two sides by the
regiments. The Washingtons did their work well and the shells from the
guns were effective, but for once the Nebraskans failed in their usual
dash and came up too late to cut off the retreat of the enemy and
prevent his escape.

[Illustration: GUN AT PUMPING STATION FIRING ON MARIQUINA.]

Again on the 24th the two Nordenfelts under Lieutenant Webb moved down
the Mariquina road, and did excellent work in aiding the Nebraskans to
drive the natives back towards San Mateo. The B. and L. rifles from the
hill fired into bodies of natives to the left of Mariquina Church on
this occasion, and the death roster of the insurgents for that day was
very great. A revolving Hotchkiss under Corporal Hesburg, located close
to the Deposito, also inflicted severe damage on the natives. Still the
enemy at this point was alert and aggressive. The next day Major Mulford
went scouting with a small force to the right of Mariquina. Soon after
he reached the valley he was completely surrounded by the insurgents.
Then the big guns on the hill sent bursting shells fast into the
Filipino ranks and soon they retired stubbornly into the woods. Several
of Major Mulford's men were killed or wounded, and he stated afterwards
that the Utah guns had saved himself and party. This skirmish proved
that the natives were gathering there in a larger and more formidable
force, and this circumstances led to the burning of Mariquina. All night
the flames from the bamboo huts and old Spanish mansions illumined the
valley, and when the troops descended the next morning they found that
all the south and the greater part of the north end of the city were
entirely destroyed.

There was comparative quietude after that until March 6th, when the
natives began to resume the annoying fire on the infantry, and an
artillery demonstration became imperative. As the insurgent attack came
about daylight, the guns under Lieutenant Gibbs bombarded the valley
from the hill, driving the enemy northward. Another large force of the
Tagalans swept down upon the Nebraskan outposts on the left and a deadly
affray commenced. Reinforcements were rushed to the aid of the stricken
sentries, who were gradually forced back by the superior numbers of the
assaulting party. Sergeant Ford Fisher with the fifth section gun dashed
out of the camp to the front. For three-quarters of a mile the
diminutive Filipinos horses with which the guns had lately been equipped
sped down the ridges under a galling fire. On the brow of the hill the
gun whirled into action long enough to drive the enemy back a few
hundred yards. Again the piece limbered up and rattled over the hard
lava road for a new position. The Tagalans soon centered a murderous
fire from three points upon the big gun as a desperate measure to
annihilate this new terror. A horse ridden by Private Engler was shot
down, but was able to recover himself sufficiently to gain the shelter
of a small gulch a few yards farther on. From its shelter the big gun
pounded over the road to another gulch which had been deserted just a
few minutes previously by a company of Nebraskans. The heavy limber
chest was left at the foot of the hill and on their hands and knees the
men pushed the piece forward until the bore of the gun gleamed down the
slope. A heavy volley answered from the plain below. Ford Fisher said
afterwards that he saw a Filipino sharpshooter behind a rock fire six
times point blank at the gunner as he was sighting the piece. Suddenly
the roar of a cannon tore down the hill. The Tagalans answered it with a
fiendish yell and came steadily onward. The men on the gun worked like
Trojans, but they could not force the Malays back. Just as it seemed as
if the gun would have to retire the tall white figure of Colonel
Stotsenberg could be seen with galloping steed coming up the hill.
Instantly the wavering infantry line tightened. The Colonel's pistol
flashed in the sunlight, and the whole column swung up the eminence to
victory. The voice of the big gun bellowed back its notes of defiance
and the haughty foe fled in terror.

During the encounter Corporal McDonald with a revolving Hotchkiss cannon
performed some excellent service on the right in aiding the Oregon
infantry. Most of the fighting had been done at from 100 to 150 yards
range. The casualty list of the Nebraskans was heavy, and an immense
number of Filipinos was killed. The infantry followed the retreating
natives for three miles.

On the 7th, in conjunction with the river fleet, the guns aided the
Nebraska, Wyoming and Washington infantry in forcing the enemy through
the woods towards Guadaloupe and Pasig Lake. The guns under Captain
Wedgewood shelled the insurgents to the south of San Juan del Monte and
aided the infantry very materially in its advance. The gunboats
hammered the natives on the left bank of the river and sent them
scurrying into the woods beyond Guadaloupe.

It was decided to take the town of Mariquina on the 16th of March, and
Major Young with the left platoon of Battery A shelled the woods to the
north and west of the town so effectively that when the infantry forces
entered the place they found it deserted.

This ended the fighting in that vicinity until the general advance of
March 25th.

[Illustration: UTAH GUNS ON MANILA & DAGUPAN RAILWAY EN ROUTE FOR THE
FRONT.]

On March 25th began that remarkable advance which never ended until the
native forces were driven beyond Calumpit and San Fernando into the
hills north of San Isidro and Tarlac. The American forces had long been
inactive gathering strength for the difficulties before them, and now
that this strength had been mustered they were eager for the fray. The
plan was for the commands of Generals H.G. Otis and Hale to swing around
to the right and cut off the retreat of the enemy from that quarter,
while General Wheaton's brigade was to strike the foe in front and not
move forward until the other forces had had sufficient time to
straighten out the line. A large body of the insurgents had assembled
at Malabon. The entire preparation had been made for the capture of this
force.

Otis's brigade on the left consisted in the order given of the Kansas,
the Third Artillery (infantry), and the Montana regiment; in the center
was the divisional artillery under Major Young and then troops of the
Fourth United States Cavalry, and on the right was Hale's command,
containing the Tenth Pennsylvania, South Dakota and Nebraska regiments.
The Nebraskans were on the extreme right, while the Kansans formed the
pivotal regiment.

The artillery designated to take part in the forward movement were two
B. and L. rifles, under command of Lieutenant Critchlow; two B.L. rifles
of the Sixth United States Artillery, under Lieutenant Fleming, and an
automatic gun under command of Ensign Davis of the navy. On the evening
of the 24th Lieutenant Fleming's guns were removed from the old
intrenchment in front of Fort MacArthur, and were replaced by two B. and
L. rifles under Lieutenant Gibbs of Battery A, who had formerly been
stationed in front of the Colorado line at Sampaloe. Major Grant at this
period was no longer in immediate command of Battery B, as he had been
detailed as commander of the river gunboats on February 17th. During the
period of waiting the Government mules had arrived and the rifles under
Lieutenants Critchlow and Fleming were now equipped for the journey into
the jungle.

Few artillery exploits can compare in dash and daring with that
performed by Lieutenant Naylor out on the right of the line early in the
morning of the 25th. Many brave and reckless deeds with guns at close
range were done by artillery forces on other occasions in the Filipino
campaign, but it is hardly probable that any field pieces have been
rushed so far beyond infantry support as they were on this day before
the enemy at San Francisco del Monte.

Lieutenant Naylor's position lay in a sunken road at a point where the
lines of the Tenth Pennsylvania and South Dakota regiments joined. For a
distance of about 800 yards the road, which had been constructed by the
Spanish, extended toward the Tagalan earthworks. At the point the road
abruptly ends, and there is a plat of hard ground. Fifty yards farther
on a rude barricade had been erected as a shelter for the native
outposts, and a hundred yards in advance of this the enemy's strong line
of earthworks widened out across the top of a gently rising eminence.
This position had been accurately located several days previously by a
reconnoitering party.

Early in the morning the guns moved to the end of the sunken road and
began the perilous journey up this narrow defile. With Lieutenant Naylor
were Captain Crainbuhl and Lieutenant Perry of General Hale's staff and
a detachment of eight men of the Tenth Pennsylvania Regiment under
charge of a sergeant. Every one knew the danger that accompanied an
expedition of this character, and there was silence as perfect as that
of a tomb, save when one of the wheels of the heavy guns rumbled in a
rut. A few hundred yards from the camp they crossed a small stream and,
as the road broadened at this place, there was ample room to unlimber
the pieces. This was done so that there would be no delay when the time
for action should come. The pieces were placed in front and the two
limbers followed. At the end of the road the squad of infantry deployed
as skirmishers to drive back the Filipino sentries. Then the guns were
rushed up on the flat; two shells shrieked through the air towards the
insurgent intrenchments, which loomed up darkly on the hill, and the
bombardment began. At the first bark of the big guns the native outposts
fled precipitately for the protection of the heavier works on the summit
of the knoll. The roaring monsters now hurled a perfect stream of iron
into the place, and after responding feebly for a few minutes the foe
retired in haste across the San Juan river towards San Francisco del
Monte. The artillery advanced to the stream and sent shells flying after
them until it became too hazardous to continue the bombardment, owing to
the approach of our troops. Down the causeway over which the Tagalans
fled in their mad desire to escape whole squads of Filipinos lay. As the
guns had made the advance almost entirely unaided by the infantry it
was purely an artillery charge, and to the artillery belonged the
victory. General Hale rode up a few minutes later and personally
complimented Lieutenant Naylor upon the ability with which he had
handled his men in this successful maneuver.

As the guns were unprovided with mules they were unable to proceed and
retired to their former position.

The engagement opened up by Lieutenant Naylor's men on the right found
an echoing response from the guns of Lieutenants Critchlow and Fleming.
As they were to continue the advance their general course lay along the
railroad track, which stretches entirely across Luzon Island from Manila
to Dagupan. Just after dawn on the 25th the infantry moved forward about
700 yards ahead of the artillery, which followed the Novaliches road. A
strong force of the enemy was encountered heavily intrenched in a
position commanding the Novaliches and Malinta roads. The infantry swung
into line and attempted to force back the Tagalans, who stubbornly
resisted the attack of our column. Two large guns were soon brought into
play and the natives gradually retired. An examination later showed that
the defenses of the insurgents were remarkably constructed; in some
cases the main breastworks were twenty feet thick. The first day's
fighting had taught them a lesson by which they had profited.

General MacArthur gave orders for the artillery to remain with him
during the advance, as it was impossible to move over the ridges. A
troop of the Fourth Cavalry, under Major Rucker, also remained with the
General. In the afternoon the artillery had turned down a small valley
toward the bed of the Pulilan river. The infantry had entirely
disappeared from the division commander's view, owing to a mountain
which lay between our forces and the artillery position. The general
whereabouts of our troops could be ascertained by the battle-sound, but
occasionally this died away as the moving column advanced. The General
sent forward one of his aids with a view of re-establishing our lines;
but he was fired upon and compelled to retire. The troops of cavalry
then dismounted and deploying as skirmishers soon dislodged the enemy.
Soon heavy firing was heard and an orderly rushed back asking for
reinforcements. The General sent word back that he had no reinforcements
to give. Just then Major Bell rode up and said he wished one of the Utah
guns and the General authorized Major Young to take one of the big
rifles and a Browning gun under Ensign Davis.

Majors Bell and Young went forward to locate a position for the pieces.
They discovered that where the road crosses the river the banks of the
Pulilan rise to an almost perpendicular height of nearly fifteen feet. A
road a little distance above, so small that it could only be utilized
for carometas, crosses the river a short distance beyond the dismantled
bridge. On the right abutment of the bridge the Filipinos had
constructed a very formidable breastwork of earth and stone, and the
heavy steel beam of the bridge was arranged above this so as to leave a
long slot for the rifles the whole length of the work. This menaced the
surrounding approaches. A short distance below this was a boiler and
engine-house and on the other side of the river and lower down was a
remarkable field work. It extended along the river a distance of two
hundred feet, and was constructed with the same wonderful skill as the
smaller one at the bridge abutment. It had the same long slot flaring
outward about eighteen inches and the upper part of the work was
substantially held by bamboo flooring.

The two Majors left the artillery piece and went forward to discover a
good site for the big gun. Major Young selected a place just under the
brow of the hill. The enemy was only 100 yards beyond, but our exact
location was screened from his view by a thick undergrowth of bamboo. A
heavy stone wall was used as a shelter for the men. Meanwhile the
cavalry stood a terrific fire. Out of less than forty men who took part
in the encounter nine were killed and wounded, a casualty list of almost
one-fourth of their number. The guns rushed into action. Major Young
directed that the Colt's automatic be turned on the slots to protect the
big gun. At the first boom of the rifle all the attention of the
insurgents was turned upon the crews working the piece, but the bamboo
screen kept them from taking accurate aim. Of the three shells fired by
Corporal Don Johnson, two struck immediately in the slot holes and burst
in the interior, doing considerable damage to the bamboo shed and above
all terrifying the dusky warriors, who turned and fled. The spitting
Colts and breaking shrapnel followed them with deadly effect. The
artillery then lumbered up and dashed to a position on the hill, from
which the boiler-house could be bombarded with annihilating effect. The
cavalry had stood a heavy fire during all this time at a range of
seventy-five yards, and when the beam had been examined after the enemy
had been driven out it showed the marks of eighty-nine cavalry bullets.

That night the weary troops rested on the banks of the river. The next
morning, March 26th, an early advance was made upon the insurgents'
position at Malinta and Polo. It was here the moving column met the
advancing lines of General Wheaton, and then it was learned that he had
marched forward simultaneously with Hale's flying command, and that the
wily native had had ample time to flee out of Malabon and his old
position at Caloocan. So the projected coup had failed. Lieutenant Gibbs
with the right platoon of Battery A and one gun of Battery B and a
mortar bombarded Malabon and the surrounding country. When the shelling
ceased the Oregon regiment charged over the open and assaulted the
enemy's works, which were taken after a stubborn fight. The routed
Tagalans fled along the railroad track towards Malinta.

One gun under Lieutenant Seaman accompanied Wheaton on this march as far
as the foot of the hill leading to Malinta, and was unloaded from the
car under a shower of Mauser bullets. Private Parker J. Hall of Battery
B was wounded at this point while standing on the track. A few shells
were fired into distant intrenched position on the hill, but when
Wheaton resumed his advance early in the morning the B. and L. rifle was
returned to its position at Fort MacArthur. It was during the advance up
the hill a few moments later that the gallant, white-haired General
Egbert, veteran of many battles, was fatally shot through the stomach.

In the meantime the artillery with General MacArthur's division
continued the march up the road close by the railway line. While the
artillery was sending shell fast into the Filipino position at Malinta
and Meycayauan, and occupying their attention, General Hale executed a
rather brilliant flank movement and forced the enemy to retreat with
considerable loss. When the march was resumed on the 27th, the artillery
was moved up to a position just behind the first battalion of the Kansas
regiment, while all the rest of Otis's brigade remained in the rear.

[Illustration: FIRST PLATOON. BATTERY A, READY TO MOVE TO MALOLOS.]

When General MacArthur's division moved forward on March 25th, General
Hall, with the Colorado and Minnesota regiments, moved down the
Mariquina valley towards the San Francisco del Monte, where the bullets
of the South Dakotas and Lieutenant Naylor's shells were battering
against the walls. General Hall's advance was so warmly contested that
it became necessary for the guns on the hill to bombard the city and
surrounding woods to the north and west. The infantry was then able to
press forward and drive the natives back from the valley toward San
Mateo.

On the 31st of March General Hall essayed a more extended advance, and
on this occasion his forces consisted of the Fourth and Twenty-third
regular infantry, the Minnesota and Colorado regiments and two Utah B.
and L. rifles, commanded by Captain Wedgewood. The movement began at
dawn. The regulars came from the South and the Minnesotas and
Coloradoans around the north of Mariquina. The town was entered before
the enemy had begun to fire. The attack was sudden and effective, and as
the natives began to retreat a gun under Sergeant Nystrom and another
close by the Mariquina Church commanded by Captain Wedgewood played
vigorously on their ranks. The infantry followed the natives six miles,
and from the hills overlooking the city San Mateo was bombarded by the
two guns.

The natives were again in retreat when a telegram arrived from Otis,
which showed that he feared the natives might be preparing to make
another entrance into Manila. It read: "Wheaton has engaged enemy at
Malolos and taken that place. A very small force of the enemy was there.
Withdraw all your forces which are moving towards San Mateo and bring
them back to La Loma Church." It was a wearisome march to La Loma after
the fatigue of the day's campaign, and when the men arrived there with
the guns they were forced to sleep among the graves of the churchyard
without blankets and in a pelting rain. The next day the guns were
ordered back to their old position above Mariquina, where they remained
until relieved by the Sixth United States Infantry, when they joined the
rest of the command at San Fernando.

On April 27th our forces met the Filipinos on the banks of the Marilao
river, on which occasion the noses of the big guns were pushed to within
fifty yards of the native earthworks. The guns employed were two under
Lieutenant Critchlow, a platoon of Dyer's light battery and Colt's
automatic under Ensign Davis. The Kansans under Major Metcalf had
deployed on the left and approached the river, but they were forced back
by the heavy fire of the insurgents, who had cut away the intervening
trees to give a clear sweep for their rifles. The whole north side of
the river had been cleverly and completely intrenched so that it formed
an almost impregnable fortification when attacked from the front. The
causeway up which the artillery had to advance was commanded by the
insurgent infantry. Across the river where the infantry first engaged
the enemy, the natives were about 800 yards distant. Major Young went
forward with Ensign Davis to locate a good position for the guns. While
there General Funston came up and stated he had seen quite a number of
cascos further down the river, and that if Major Young would protect his
men with an artillery fire he would be able to cross the river and flank
the enemy. This was agreed to, and a company of Kansans accompanied the
guns as a support. Lieutenant Critchlow's guns were quickly turned upon
the earthworks. As the big rifles roared across the stream the small
arms and the Colt's automatic centered a withering fire on the
intrenchments to keep the enemy's fire inaccurate. This vigorous
demonstration terrified the Tagalans and soon several white flags
appeared fluttering above the trenches. The firing ceased and the
Filipinos were ordered to stand up. Some few of them reluctantly showed
themselves, but the greater number ran through the get-away ditch and
vanished in the dark fringe of the bamboo forest. Lieutenant Coulter of
the Tenth Pennsylvania regiment with an enlisted man stripped and swam
the river and walked directly into the enemy's trenches. The two naked
men took as many rifles as they could hold from the defeated Malays. By
this time Colonel Funston, who had crossed the river, came up and took
some thirty natives prisoners.

As the bridge crossing a branch of the Marilao river at this point had
been destroyed by the insurgents, the artillery moved to a new position
by the railroad track until a new bridge could be constructed by the
engineers. Just as night came on the natives were seen to emerge in a
large force from the woods and move towards our lines. Soon the entire
American host was sturdily engaged in repelling the attack. In the dark
it was impossible to exactly locate our infantry, but Major Young, at a
venture, directed several shots over our column at a range of from 2000
to 2500 yards. The Filipinos soon retreated. It was afterwards learned
that these shells had fallen in the midst of the attacking force.

This spirited encounter was the subject of a special report of the chief
of artillery to the division commander in which Lieutenant Critchlow and
the cannoneers received special mention for their gallantry.

That night a pontoon bridge was built across the river and on the
morning of the 28th the artillery moved across and encamped during the
succeeding day and night in the suburbs of Malolos. An advance of only a
short distance had been made the next morning when a body of the enemy
was encountered at Bocaue. Here it was necessary to cross the Santa Mone
river. This was attempted with some difficulty, as only the guns could
be taken over on the bridge and the mules had to be swum across. The
pieces and accoutrements across, the artillery immediately went into
action against the long lines of Filipinos. A railroad train in the
hands of the insurgents could be seen in the distance and some natives
were busily engaged in applying torches to the engine-house. A few
shells were sent screaming in that direction and the engineer needed no
further orders to speed with all dispatch toward the north country.
Again the guns were limbered up and the force advanced to the Bagoa
river, where it was again necessary to drag the guns across the shaky
bridge and force the reluctant mules to swim.

By this time the infantry had pushed some distance ahead, and suddenly
there was heavy firing near another dismantled bridge close to the
Guiguinta. Both the town and the bridge had been burned by the
insurgents, and as soon as the infantry force crossed the railway track
it was greeted with such a heavy fire that there were thirty casualties
within a few minutes. The artillery came forward, as it had done before
in many desperate fights, at the critical moment. The mules were
unhitched and the cannoneers dashed with two of the guns across the
shattered bridge and began firing from the top of the track. The
insurgent fire came directly down the railroad grade. Private Pender was
shot through the hip while working at the gun. In a few moments the
shrapnel had torn the Filipino earthworks and in the semi-darkness the
dusky figures of the Filipinos could be seen in retreat. The river which
barred the way was crossed the next day.

When evening fell on the 30th, the towers of Malolos, the insurgent
capital, where a few months before Don Emilio Aguinaldo had been crowned
president of the Filipino republic, were almost within view. A long line
of Filipino intrenchments defended the approaches to the city. All eyes
had been turned from the beginning of the insurrection toward Malolos,
and here it was expected that on the morrow Aguinaldo, with a host of
his black warriors around him, would make a desperate effort to resist
the aggression of the American troops. The four big rifles and the
Colt's automatic were moved into a position at dusk close to a deserted
line of intrenchments south of Malolos. Majors Bell and Young, later in
the evening, went forward to locate a position for constructing
emplacements for the guns. Suddenly there was a long flash from a low
line of Filipino intrenchments 1000 yards to the front. They saw the
flash in time to guard themselves by the shelter of a rice stack from
the pattering bullets. Their mission by this time was accomplished, for
they had discovered a strong position for the rifles just within a
circle of bamboo trees from which there was an easy view of the enemy's
works.

Late that night, in the tropic darkness of the overhanging trees, a line
of men, carrying picks and spades, trudged out slowly from the
encampment. They were guided by First Sergeant John Anderson of Battery
B. Soon the rice stack where the emplacements were to be made could be
seen through the gloom. The work was begun quietly, for the Filipinos in
the distance were known to be on the alert. An axe struck sharply
against a bamboo and a pick dinned resoundingly in the hard earth. Every
one looked searchingly into the distance, where a response was looked
for from a hundred guns. Major Young stated that he had posted a lookout
near by so that when he called "flash" the men could take care of
themselves as they saw fit before the winged bullets arrived. So the
work went on. When the earth had been reared about one foot, the lookout
suddenly called "flash" and twenty men dropped to the ground. But there
was no report and no bullets came. The lookout had seen some restless
Filipino lighting a cigarette. The intrenchments were ready shortly
after midnight, and before dawn on the morning of the 31st the guns were
moved into position. The insurgents formed a belligerent half-circle
around the city, and were prepared to advance from three sides when the
roar of one of the big guns gave the signal to move. When the light came
it brought into bright relief the heavy earthworks of the enemy, and a
body of soldiers was observed standing idly on the railroad track about
ten hundred yards away. Suddenly the yawning big guns roared over the
plain and a shell burst over the Filipino intrenchments. There was a
brief response. The vigorous click-click of the automatic joined in with
the roar of the big guns. Within an hour the infantrymen were advancing
upon the outer works of the city from three sides, and the Filipinos
could be seen fleeing down the railroad grade. They were followed by
bullets from rapid-fire guns and several shells were sent into the
insurgents city at a range of four kilometers. Afterwards it was learned
that the natives had been driven from their two lines of intrenchments,
which were 1000 yards apart, a fact which clearly indicated the accuracy
of the firing. As soon as the enemy was dispersed the pieces were
limbered and while one section took the winding course of the Malolos
road into the city the other went by way of the railroad. For several
thousands yards in front of Malolos the track had been torn up by the
insurgents and the gun which went up the track had great difficulty in
passing. At one place where the bridge had been destroyed it was
necessary to replace a large number of ties which had been hurriedly
thrown into a body of water near by.

All morning a long curling line of smoke could be seen from the distance
arising from the heart of the city. When the artillery swept into the
city side by side with the rigid column of infantry they found half the
place in ruins; the great church which had been used as a congressional
hall was fading in the flame. The American had found the city a burning
Moscow and the people, like the patriotic Russians, had applied the
torch to the capital upon which they had centered their fondest dreams.
The soldiers trooped into city, mud-bespattered and weary, and commented
in loud tones of surprise on their peaceful entry into a city where they
had looked for the bloodiest strife of the insurrection. The artillery
made a striking appearance as the big mules galloped over the evacuated
town. The guns were parked in the plaza before the Hall of Congress of
the insurgent capital, and Major MacArthur accorded to Major Young the
honor of raising the first American flag over the walls of the rebel
capital. It may be added here that several weeks later the Utah band
played patriotic airs in the hall where but a short time ago Aguinaldo
was declared president of the Philippines.

[Illustration: UTAH GUNS IN PARK, AT CONGRESSIONAL HALL, MALOLOS.]

The troops remained for several days inactive at Malolos to recuperate
after the rigors of the long march. During this time the two guns
commanded by Lieutenant Gibbs at Caloocan were brought to Malolos by
rail, and Captain Wedgewood took charge of them, while Lieutenant Gibbs
returned to the two platoons stationed at the waterworks.

On April 7th a reconnoitering expedition went out to investigate the
enemy's position to the east of Quingua in the vicinity of Bag Bag.
Major Bell commanded the party, which consisted of a troop of the Fourth
Cavalry, a Hotchkiss revolving cannon and one Hotchkiss mountain gun, in
charge of John A. Anderson. They found a place where the river could be
forded and discovered that the insurgents were strongly intrenched on
the banks of the Bag Bag river. The country at this time was heavily
timbered and the party was able to return unnoticed by the enemy.

A severe battle occurred on April 23rd as the forces closed in on
Quingua. A reconnoitering party of cavalry encountered a large body of
insurgents and the fire was so withering that Major Bell was forced to
retire. Reinforcements of infantry were promptly called for and soon the
Nebraskans moved forward to the fray. The fight lasted several hours,
and the infantry and cavalry were forced to endure a heavy fire out in
the open from a long line of Filipinos intrenchments hidden in a line of
underbrush and trees. It was during this engagement that the gallant
Stotsenberg was killed while rallying his men for the charge over the
open. The artillery did not arrive until 11 o'clock, when two rifles,
one from each battery under Captain Wedgewood and Lieutenant Critchlow
came to the front and as usual soon ended the argument. Private D.J.
Davis of Battery A was shot through the fleshy part of the leg, and
while standing twenty yards behind the piece Captain Wedgewood was
wounded in the hand and stomach by a flying piece of copper from the
defective gun breech. The artillery occupied a position at one hundred
yards range during this stubbornly fought engagement. The guns were
partially sheltered by the foliage of a clump of trees to the left of
the Pulilan road and the Nebraska infantry. Firing from the artillery
was plainly effective, and after forty-five minutes of continual
bombardment the insurgents retired over the Pulilan road toward Bag
Bag.

During this engagement Lieutenant Fleming of the Sixth United States
Artillery arrived from Malolos with one of his own and a Battery B gun,
manned by a Utah detachment, and did valuable service at a
one-thousand-yard range. As the natives retreated in columns they
afforded a conspicuous target and bursting shrapnel tore large holes in
the retiring lines. Private Abplanalp of Battery B, one of the drivers,
was shot through the hand and arm while in the rear of the firing line.

This was considered to be as fierce a fight as that in which the rough
riders won their way to glory at Las Guasimas. At that point three
regiments were engaged and there were seventy casualties. At Quingua
there were only five hundred Americans against a large body of
insurgents and sixty of these were killed or wounded. General Gregoria
del Pilar, the dashing young Filipino leader, who had previously visited
General Otis for the purpose of arranging terms of peace, commanded the
dusky warriors at this place. Though he was forced to retreat he took
upon himself the credit of killing Colonel Stotsenberg, and afterwards
boasted that he had slain one thousand Americans in the engagement.

The next morning Lieutenant Fleming with two big rifles and a Hotchkiss
revolving cannon, in charge of Gunner Corporal M.C. Jensen, forded the
Quingua river, a tributary of the Rio Chico, which in turn draws its
waters from the Rio Grande de Pampanga, at Calumpit. The remainder of
the artillery, consisting of a platoon of Battery A, under Lieutenant
Naylor, and one gun under Lieutenant Critchlow, went on down the Pulilan
road toward Bag Bag. There was a sharp encounter on this road, during
which a body of the enemy about a thousand yards to the right attempted
a flank movement, but a few shots from the big guns and the Hotchkiss
forced them to change their course. The guns directly under Major Young
on the other side of the river became involved about three hundred yards
south of the enemy's long low line of earthworks at Bag Rag. Their
intrenchments occupied the strip of land at the junction of the Rio
Chico and the Bag Bag rivers. When a reconnoitering party visited this
place on April 7th the plain surrounding the Bag Bag was covered with
bamboo and underbrush, but now all the plain was as clean and level as
if it had been swept by a cyclone. Thus the intrenched Malays had
cleared a spot which commanded the plains for miles around.

Infantry and artillery advanced from both sides of the Quingua--Hale
with Fleming on the other side and Wheaton with Utah to the south. Soon
the artillery was engaged on the Pulilan road, 225 yards from the enemy.
At this time the infantry force was fifty yards in the rear, where it
was masked from the enemy but could render no important assistance. The
fire from the Tagalan intrenchments was murderous. While the artillery
fire was as rapid as possible at least two responsive volleys came from
the intrenchments after each shot. Private Max Madison fell, killed
instantly, early in the action; Private Frederick Bumiller received a
fatal wound through the hips. Two other cannoneers were hit in their
attire by glance balls and all three of the big guns were cut with
Mausers. In Lieutenant Critchlow's single detachment of eight men five
were struck--two killed and one seriously wounded. Wheaton's line
meanwhile bore in from the left and the artillery swung forward with the
line until they were almost on the opposite bank from the enemy. The
armored train, equipped with Gatlings revolving cannon, pulled up at
this point and turned loose its armament upon the enemy at a 200-yard
range. The insurgents stubbornly fell back under the terrific fire.

On the opposite bank Corporal Jensen and his crew, sixty yards from the
enemy's position, were ripping the low intrenchments with the revolving
cannon. His position was perilous and his gallant fight soon ended. He
was pierced through the stomach with a bullet and on the next day died
from the wound. Lieutenant Fleming, in his report to the chief of
artillery, says of him: "I desire especially to mention Corporal M.C.
Jensen for gallantry in this action. His fearlessness undoubtedly cost
him his life." He also recommends in this report that Corporal Jensen be
awarded a certificate of merit.

Calumpit is a city which the insurgents looked upon as invulnerable. Its
huts and stone bridges are on both sides of the Rio Grande de
Pampanga--the broadest and longest river in Luzon. It was here a few
months before that the insurgents captured many thousand Spanish
prisoners with all their arms, and they were prepared to vigorously
contest the advance of the American troops.

The guns of Utah and the two big rifles of Lieutenant Fleming were on
the south side of the Bag Bag, and it is only a mile from here to the
Filipino stronghold. The advance began early on the morning of the 27th.
A platoon under Lieutenant Naylor, who had been in charge of Battery A
pieces since the wounding of Captain Wedgewood, one gun under Lieutenant
Critchlow, Fleming's two guns and a Hotchkiss in charge of Corporal
Bjarnson were pushed by hand over a bridge hastily constructed over the
waters of the Bag Bag. The clattering din of the infantry could soon be
heard in altercation with the insurgents at the front. The insurgents,
behind intrenchments, were sending volleys fast into the Americans from
the north bank of the Pampanga. It was observed that the long bridge had
been partially destroyed and the rails torn from the track for several
hundred yards. The heavy iron beams of the bridge were placed above the
two lines of intrenchments. Iron rails supported the ponderous beams,
and between them was formed a long slot for Filipino rifles.

The three big Utah guns were rushed to a position on the right of the
station, about 100 yards from the enemy, and where there was partial
protection from a nipa hut. Earthworks were quickly thrown up and to
divert the enemy's attention while this was going on, a squad of Montana
men kept up a constant fire from a position immediately in front of the
artillery. Bullets came in sheets from the Filipino position. A Montana
sharpshooter, shot through the head, fell dead at the foot of the
half-made emplacement. Fleming's guns pointed through an aperture broken
through the solid brick walls of the station facing the half-demolished
bridge. Further off to the left Corporal Bjarnson with the revolving
Hotchkiss was with the line of Kansas infantry under Colonel Funston.
Out on the left Colonel Funston was performing the famed and intrepid
feat by which he was able to cross the river. Protected by the swift
fire of the revolving Hotchkiss, a Kansas man with a rope swam the swift
moving waters of the Pampanga and fastened one end to the base of a
bamboo tree. Then Funston with about forty of his men crossed the river
on hastily constructed rafts, guided by the long ropes. Suddenly this
small body of warriors charged and attacked the insurgents on the left
flank. The insurgents who had valiantly and stubbornly held their
position, were terrorized by the unexpected onslaught, and the whole
line in the east side of the bridge sprang from the intrenchment and
fled northward along the railroad embankment. Natives were strewn thick
upon the banks of the river as they ran. A mounted Filipino officer was
shot through the heart as he stood with flashing sword vainly trying to
rally his confused and fleeing troops. The Tagalans to the right were
touched with consternation and fled from their bulwarks. And so during
this one hour Colonel Funston performed the most dashing deed of the war
and the Malay hosts were driven from their strongest defense. Fifteen
hundred American soldiers in this battle contested with 12,000
intrenched warriors of Luzon, and won by their prowess and the strategy
of a gallant leader.

The two brigades were allowed to rest for several days on the sunny
banks of the Pampanga. On May 14th the troops began the march toward San
Fernando, which lies green and low at the base of Mt. Arayat, which can
be seen for many miles around. The artillery, with the mules, crossed
the river on rafts. Wheaton advanced up the railroad track while Hale's
brigade strung out over the Apalit road.

A revolving Hotchkiss cannon and one Gatling gun, manned by Battery B
detachments, were mounted on trucks. This moving battery was commanded
by Lieutenant Naylor. As the troops approached Santo Tomas the
insurgents were discovered, intrenched on both sides of the railroad. As
the infantry engaged them on the right, Lieutenant Naylor's machine
guns played on the thin line of smoke curling above the Filipino
intrenchment. As the infantry pressed them on the right they retreated
over the railroad towards a long line of intrenchments, and the bullets
from the Gatling fell among them here faster than autumn leaves. Colonel
Funston, at the head of his troops, took the fire line of intrenchments
on the left of the track and moved down on the Tagalans, who had
constructed a long line of intrenchments parallel with the railway. They
were beaten back by the Kansas men, but in this charge Colonel Funston
fell, having sustained a slight wound in the arm. During this engagement
General Luna, most renowned of the Filipino chiefs, was wounded in the
arm, and as there was only a light infantry fire, the opinion prevailed
that this was inflicted by Lieutenant Naylor's fast-clicking Gatling
gun. General Wheaton personally praised Lieutenant Naylor for his work
in the Santo Tomas battle, and afterwards in his report recommended him
for meritorious service.

Over on the right up the Apalit road Captain Wedgewood and Lieutenant
Critchlow were encountering difficulties. The insurgents had constructed
pitfalls in the road. They were thinly covered with a layer of leaves
and earth and the wayward feet of mule and soldier were menaced beneath
with sharp pointed wedges of bamboo. These were discovered early in the
march and no accidents resulted from them. There was some brisk fighting
on this end of the line and the big guns shelled the insurgents on the
opposite side of the river. The whole of the next day was consumed in
transporting the artillery and equipage across the river on a raft
constructed by the engineers, and on May 6th they entered San Fernando.

This fair city was half destroyed by flames, and when the troops entered
no lingering black warriors could be found. They had all retreated
farther north, following in the general direction of the railway.
Major-General MacArthur's headquarters were established near the center
of that part of the city which was untouched by the flames, and close by
the Utah guns were parked. Later one of the big guns was utilized for
outpost duty, a rather remarkable use for artillery. Every night after
the Filipinos had begun to gather again near the city one of the pieces
with a gun crew would go down a sunken road and watch all night with the
farthest outposts of the infantry.

During this period Major-General Otis had issued an order offering
thirty pesos to every Filipino warrior who would return his rifle to the
American authorities. On May 23rd Major Bell went on an expedition up
the railway track for the purpose of posting up the order, and took with
him two troops of the Fourth Cavalry and a revolving Hotchkiss gun,
manned by Sergeant Emil Johnson and Corporal Hesburg of Battery A and
Private Martin of Battery B. All the men were mounted and the cannon
equipped with a small Filipino horse, so that if necessary a hasty
retreat could be made. They proceeded up the railway track, and notices
were duly and conspicuously left at Bacalor and Quiuag. Just as the
forces reached the outskirts of Santa Rita they were fired on by a large
body of insurgents, who were heavily intrenched around the city. The
revolving cannon was used effectively and Major Bell and his men went
into action five times, but the insurgent attack was too fierce for the
small force and it was obliged to retreat. With a whoop of joy the
Filipinos rose from their trenches in pursuit, cheering loudly as they
came. They followed for five miles through Bacalor, and as far back as
their old intrenchments surrounding San Fernando. The rather meagre
encouragement of having been able to chase a small troop of cavalry
seemed to give the Tagalans at this time an idea that they had the whole
American force in retreat.

During the night word was brought to General MacArthur that the
Filipinos were preparing to make an attack early the next morning. At
dawn the Montana and Kansas regiments and a platoon under Lieutenant
Naylor went out to meet them. The Filipinos were in force in their old
position to the northwest. The Kansas went through some cornfields on
the left and the Montanas through a sunken road to the right. The
artillery remained in a concealed position in the center and waited
until the two regiments had moved up on the startled natives from both
flanks. As the insurgents retreated in confusion the big guns played on
the scattered ranks. A large number of the natives were killed during
this clever maneuver and thirty of their rifles were captured.

The Tagalans when on the warpath are persistent. The next day they
occupied intrenchments farther to the north. They were again driven back
and this time they took up a position towards Mexico and in front of the
Iowa troops.

During the next few days the Malay hordes came toward San Fernando from
all sides. Eventually their forces completely surrounded the city.
General MacArthur watched their plans, saw them tearing up the earth for
intrenchments and waited. It was apparent that they were preparing to
march with crushing force upon the American troops.

The cloud burst on June 16th. Just at that time, when the Americans were
not looking for them, the Tagalans descended on the town. Captain Fred
Wheeler was out on a plain drilling a troop of the Fourth United States
Cavalry. It was in the morning and there was a heavy mist. One of
Captain Wheeler's men informed him that he could see the "niggers"
coming. The Captain could see nothing and sent for his glasses, but
before they arrived the long skirmish line of the Tagalans could be seen
emerging like spectres from the mist. Then there was a remarkable
spectacle--the Fourth Cavalry and the Tagalan warriors racing for the
same intrenchments. The cavalrymen arrived first and there the battle
began.

The natives came in from four sides. The outposts waited in the old
Filipino intrenchments and on some parts of the line the attacked
Tagalans were allowed to approach within 200 yards. Most of the guns,
when the fight began were located close to MacArthur's headquarters, but
they were soon on all parts of the line. When the attack by the
Filipinos began the gun under command of Lieutenant Naylor was on its
way to the outposts. It had been the custom to take the gun there just
before dawn and bring it back immediately after darkness came. The
advancing Filipinos began firing before the gun was in position.
Corporal Hanson was in charge at the time, and the rifle was at once
rushed to the emplacement. Word came at the same hour to Lieutenant
Naylor, who was officer of the outpost, and he went through a heavy fire
down the road leading to the intrenchment. When he arrived there the
Filipinos were within three hundred and fifty yards and were advancing
over the rice ridges at a rapid gait. The Lieutenant had a shell sent
into the approaching insurgents, who seemed astounded to find that the
artillery occupied such an advanced position. When nine shells had been
sent into their line, the Filipinos gradually drew back and were not
seen any more on this part of the line during the fight.

[Illustration: PREPARING FOR AN ENGAGEMENT.]

The Seventeenth and Twenty-second Infantry were the support on this end
of the line, which faced to the north.

On the west, east and part of the north line were the Kansas and Montana
infantry. It was to this point that the two guns of Lieutenant Gibbs
were moved when the firing began, and here the guns inflicted severe
damage on the islanders. Another gun of Battery B was also placed near
this part of the line under Lieutenant Hines, but it was unnecessary
from this position to use the artillery.

This fight was the first time the American soldiers during the whole
campaign had repulsed an attack from behind intrenchments, and they laid
back and smiled as the black men approached and then passed out some
volleys that made the whole advancing line reel. When the Tagalans began
to retreat under the awakened storm, the Americans followed, and as the
Filipinos recoiled from one regiment they were broken against another. A
company of the Twentieth Infantry located near Santo Tomas was almost
cut off by the advancing column of the enemy, and a company of the
Montana men was sent to its assistance. The fight lasted nearly two
hours and the Filipino loss amounted to several hundred. The only
casualty on the American side was a slight wound received by a Montana
man, which shows clearly what the Americans could do in a contest with a
black man under conditions more or less equal. Colonel Funston stated
afterwards that a shell from one of Lieutenant Gibbs's guns had killed
fifteen Filipinos.

The burying of dead Filipinos the next day was a tragic sight.
Sixty-four were engulfed in one trench. They were brought up in caribou
carts, and the American pulled them off with ropes and deposited them in
the common grave.

There was another fight on the 22nd, but the Filipinos seemed to have
lost their dash and courage of a few days before, and on this occasion
the artillery was not called out.

A few days later word came that the Utah battalion was ordered home, and
on the 24th day of June the Utah men boarded the train for Manila and
were carried away from the smoke of war and the darkly fought
battlefields of the East.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sergeant John A. Anderson with one gun of Battery B and a rifle of the
Sixth Artillery was in the flying column of General Lawton, who left a
path of ashes around the Pampanga province and finally drove the
insurgents from San Isidro with his detachment on the 21st of March and
arrived on the same day at Bocaue. The order to march came on the 23rd
and the Sergeant was given a position on the left of the Thirteenth
Minnesotas. From the brow of the hill above Norzagaray the guns began
shelling at 1500 yards. The front line was silenced but at this point
the natives made an effort to turn the right flank, and it was necessary
to throw many shrapnel into the advancing insurgents column before it
turned. The next day Norzagaray was entered after the place had been
shelled, and during this slight advance the artillery was in action five
times. Colonel Sommers personally commended the detachment on the
accuracy of its gunnery and its promptness. On the 25th Ongaut was
burned and on the 26th there was an engagement which lasted for some
time below Baliuag. San Maguel was taken on the 4th, and on the 13th a
few shells were thrown into San Isidro, but the insurgents, after
repeated defeats, showed small resistance here and soon retreated.

On the 24th the artillery arrived with the infantry at Candaba, and the
detachment remained quartered here until the order arrived for the Utah
men to return to Manila. The plan of Lawton's campaign was for his
troops to drive the insurgents towards Candaba, where they could be met
by the advancing forces under Major Kobbe and the river gunboats. But
when General Lawton came down to Candaba there were none but American
soldiers there as the insurgents forces had disappeared in the interior.

Shortly after the arrival in Malolos the Utah men were joined by
Corporal Dusenbury and two other men of Battery B. They with a revolving
Hotchkiss cannon were picked up by General Wheaton early in his advance
from Caloocan, and were highly praised by the General for the skill and
efficiency they had shown in many dangerous places. General Wheaton
showed his appreciation of the work of the guns by attaching several
regular and Oregon infantrymen to the pieces, in order that they could
be carried over rough places with the greatest possible dispatch.




CHAPTER IV.

THE GUNBOATS.


No history of the Utah batteries will be complete without a narrative of
the exploits of the gunboats. While the land forces performed their
duties with great honor and are to be commended in every way possible,
it must be remembered that a portion of the men were fighting on the
water and did work of such a character that they won especial mention
from those in charge when the big guns were hurling death and the
Gatlings were barking fire at the opposing army.

At first the proposition of building gunboats was not at all popular
with the authorities. Some opposed the scheme on the grounds that it
could not be successfully accomplished with the limited means at hand
and the rivers of Luzon to contend with. However, later developments
attested that those who were the originators of the plan showed greater
wisdom than their opponents.

Sometime prior to the breaking out of hostilities between the American
forces and the natives General Otis conceived the idea of employing
gunboats on the rivers and lakes for the purpose of opening up lines of
communication between difficult portions of our own lines. The fact that
the rivers were shallow was the one serious objection to the project,
but this difficulty was eliminated by the adoption of light draught
boats. The nature of the country in the vicinity of Manila and the other
towns where the heaviest fighting took place is such that it was
apparent to those who were aware of these conditions that this craft
might be engaged in protecting the advance of the infantry and
artillery; could hold the hostile bands in check until favorable
positions could be taken, and be of wonderful service in the campaign.

The first vessel to engage in this kind of work was the "Laguna de Bay,"
which has made a reputation never to be forgotten so long as the history
of the war in the Philippines remains familiar to the American mind.
This vessel is doubtless as well known as the "Olympia," the flagship of
gallant Admiral Dewey, and while there are those who fail to recall the
fact that the "Boston" or the "Raleigh" took part in the attack on the
Spanish in the bay of Manila, it is safe to assert that the operation of
the "Laguna de Bay" and her sister craft will ever be fresh in the minds
of those who have made even a casual study of the events which took
place during the campaign carried on by the brave men from the youngest
State in the Republic.

The "Laguna de Bay," the first converted gunboat, was placed in
commission on January, 1899. She was formerly used by the Spanish as an
excursion boat on the body of water from which she derived her name and
prior to the fall of Manila had been captured by the Filipinos and
turned over to the United States. She was by no means a small craft
considering her environments--shallow rivers and muddy bayous. She was
140 feet in length, 40-foot beam with a draught of four feet. When she
was fitted out it was decided to give her some protection for the men,
so her main deck, the upper deck, the pilot house and the Gatling
battery, were protected by a double sheeting of steel. The many bullet
marks on this light armor demonstrated afterwards the wisdom of this
policy. At this point it may not be out of order to interpolate the fact
that her companion gunboats were similarly protected, which accounts for
the small list of casualties.

The armament of the gunboat consisted of two three-inch marine guns, two
1.65 Hotchkiss revolving cannon and four Gatlings. At first Lieutenant
R.C. Naylor was in charge of the guns, while Captain Randolph of the
Third United States Artillery commanded the vessel. In addition to the
men from the Utah batteries, several were detailed from the various
regiments to act as sailors, riflemen and cannoneers.

The boats which were added to the fleet were the "Oeste," the "Napindan"
and the "Cavadonga." The last went into commission on May 6th and was
commanded by Lieutenant William C. Webb. The crews of the vessel were
made up of members of the Utah batteries and men from the Twenty-third
United States Infantry, the First South Dakota Infantry and the Third
United States Battery.

On the morning of February 5th the "Laguna de Bay" steamed up the Pasig
to the town of Santa Ana while the Nebraska, California and Washington
troops assaulted the enemy from the land. Twenty minutes after the boat
turned her guns upon the town the principal buildings were in flames and
the stricken garrison made all haste toward San Pedro Macati and
Guadaloupe. Next she turned her attention to those portions of the enemy
stationed in Bacoor and Mandaloya. Her forward guns tore great gaps in
the enemy's earthworks and her Gatlings raked the trenches with so
galling a fire that the foe was sent flying towards the woods in the
region of Pasig with the Nebraska Infantry in speedy pursuit. The
following morning the boat passed Santa Ana, where two three-inch Krupp
guns had been captured by the Idaho troops, and reconnoitered the native
position in the woods beyond. Late that afternoon she returned to Manila
and replenished her coal bunkers, when she resumed her old position at
the Nebraska landing.

March 7th the gunboat again passed Santa Ana and went up as far as
Guadaloupe, where the First California was quartered. General Anderson
came up the river in a launch and a consultation was held as to future
operations. Nothing of moment happened that day, but on the morrow
General King arrived on his way to Pasig for the purpose of demanding
the surrender of the town. He desired the "Laguna de Bay" to await his
return. A vigilant patrol was kept up that evening and during the night
three shots were fired by sentries from the boat. The day following was
uneventful, but on the 10th the "Oeste," which was towing a casco, came
alongside and stated that Colonel Stotsenberg had sent word that the
insurgents were massing west of the camp of the Nebraska regiment.

It was on the 14th that word was received from Colonel DuBois of the
Idaho regiment to hurry up stream at all speed. This was done and an
effort made to anchor off the mouth of the Pateros, where the infantry
fire was very brisk. Here it was that Lieutenant Harting met his death.
Harting with four men got aboard and the line was dropped when the boat
sank, being swept almost immediately under the gunwale of the "Laguna de
Bay." The three men forward grasped the gunwale and were saved, but the
officer and the fourth man went down stream. Though the Lieutenant was a
good swimmer, no sign of him could be seen. He was heavily laden with
revolver, belt and ammunition. Lieutenant Larson jumped overboard to
rescue him, but was unable to get even a glimpse of him. His body was
found two days later near General Otis's headquarters. The fourth man
escaped by swimming ashore.

By order of the Commanding General February 16th, Major Grant took
command of the river force and Captain Randolph rejoined his regiment.
The next day an assiduous fire was directed against San Pedro Macati
with telling effect.

The commanders now decided that in case the forces stationed at
Guadaloupe should be too strongly pressed by the enemy they should fall
back to San Pedro Macati, setting fire to the convent and other
principal buildings as they returned. In this instance the gunboat was
to steam up above Guadaloupe. On Sunday, February 19th, this very thing
was done though the insurgents as yet had made no advance. The soldiers
left the convent after firing it. As the gunboat moved up the stream she
met with a determined resistance. The opposing force repeatedly assailed
her, but her Gatlings finally compelled them to withdraw. An
unsuccessful effort was made to explode a quantity of nitro-glycerine in
the convent by the use of percussion shell. The boat then advanced
nearer the town where it engaged the insurgents on both sides of the
river. Every gun now played upon the enemy's lines. In the course of
twenty minutes twenty-five three-inch shells, 4200 Gatling, 1500
Krag-Jorgenson and 800 Springfields were expended. This spirited defense
caused the prudent native to withdraw to a country less subject to
leaden bullets, and the boat dropped down stream. In the afternoon
Admiral Dewey visited the "Laguna de Bay" in quest of information, and
while he was securing what he came after a Filipino sharpshooter began
taking pot shots at the Admiral, who, being unprotected, decided he was
far enough inside the enemy's lines and turned back.

At San Felipe Lieutenant Naylor was sent ashore on the following day to
cut down some trees and burn some huts so the view of the boats' gunners
would not be obstructed, which duty was performed under a straggling
fire.

Admiral Dewey visited the gunboats on the 21st, stating he would send
two rapid-fire guns for the "Laguna de Bay." That was the object of his
visit, which was short. The same day General King and his staff came
aboard and were taken up the stream. Word was soon afterward received
that the Wyoming battalion was going to advance on the enemy near
Guadaloupe on the left of the river early the following morning but as
the gunboat was not in a position to aid in the expedition she remained
inactive when the firing began the next morning.

On the day following Lieutenant Naylor again landed with a small force
of men at San Felipe, where he set fire to the buildings and cut down
trees which would have obstructed the view. Nothing occurred until the
night of the 25th, when desultory firing was heard at San Felipe, and
following this matters were unusually quiet until the night of March
1st. That day the insurgents were encountered at San Pedro Macati and
the Gatlings, the three-inch and the 1.65-inch guns were brought into
action. During the firing Sergeant Shea received a slight wound in the
hand. A three-inch gun was disabled in this engagement. Two days later
another conflict took place at the same point resulting in the complete
defeat of the enemy, who was forced from his position after a severe
bombardment.

The morning of March 4th opened cloudy with "Laguna de Bay" at San
Pedro. A sharp skirmish soon began. The natives held their position for
some time but were finally compelled to give way before the superior
strength of the Americans. Under orders from General Wheaton the gunboat
followed them and directed a deadly fire into the woods on both sides
of the river. During the fight, which lasted several hours, the boat was
frequently struck by the bullets of the enemy. It was during this
encounter that Private John Toiza of the Third Artillery laid down his
life. He was shot in the left breast, the bullet passing downward
through his heart, killing him instantly. A shell also lodged in the
1.65-inch gun, disabling it for the time.

On March 5th Admiral Dewey again came alongside and stated that General
Otis had declared he believed he would keep the gunboats down the stream
if they did not cease fighting so much. Then the Admiral added with
emphasis, "We ought to have three such boats."

Two days later when Hale's brigade made an advance upon the insurgents
on the left, and the natives were hurried with great speed toward
Mariquina and the San Mateo river, the "Laguna de Bay" again performed
excellent service in flanking them and turning their left wing against
our right.

Very early on the morning of March 13th the battle of Guadaloupe and
Pasig opened, the attention of the guns on the boat being centered on
Guadaloupe. Meanwhile Wheaton advanced his troops on the right to
Patteros and along the Pasig. The advance to Guadaloupe began along the
river with the gunboat in the vanguard. Two insurgents partially
concealed in the bushes on the banks were taken prisoners and turned
over to the Twenty-third Infantry. Sunken cascos, loaded with rock, were
frequently encountered, but the boat avoided them with only a little
delay. Generals Anderson and Wheaton moved up from the right and the
gunboat started up the stream. Near the Mariquina river they met with a
fierce fire from both sides of the stream but no one on the boat was
injured. Two Filipino launches were noticed but they got away. A casco
was found in which were the clothing of some Filipino officer and men.
The wearers had escaped.

On the day following there was a brisk engagement at Pasig in which the
town was bombarded with good effect, some thirty of the enemy being
killed, while the remainder were sent flying in all directions.

Nothing of interest occurred until Wednesday, March 15th, when a casco
manned by natives was chased down the river. She was overhauled but not
until her crew had jumped overboard and swam ashore. The "Laguna de Bay"
raised a white flag for the purpose of investigating, but the insurgents
instead of recognizing it pivoted a sharp small rim fire upon the boat
which answered with a heavy rain of shell and shrapnel.

Two days later an expedition, led by the gunboats, headed for Morong on
the opposite side of the lake. Lieutenant Webb with a Gatling and
twenty-four men went ashore to make a reconnoissance. This small
detachment was followed by three infantrymen under Captain Pratt. Upon
the advance of the Americans the enemy retreated quickly across the
plain and disappeared in the shades of the mountains beyond. One
thousand bushels of rice and three cascos were captured at this place
and a letter from General Pilar directing a general advance on Pasig was
also found. But few inhabitants remained in the town and upon
questioning them it was learned that the Filipinos had several large
launches on the Pagsanyan river.

Major Grant had long been working to interest General Lawton in favor of
an expedition against Santa Cruz. Santa Cruz is situated on the eastern
shores of the lake just behind the point of a mountain which juts out
into the water. She is the agricultural center of all the rich land on
the eastern side of the island of Luzon. All the smaller towns of the
surrounding country look up to her. She is the emporium to which all the
farmers and travelers and merchants resort and from which they reap a
bounteous harvest.

The insurgents had long since seized upon this important place as it
furnished an inexhaustible supply of food for their armies. Besides
being far out of the way and difficult of approach, she became the
military station to which the famished and fatigued insurgents looked
for support and rest. Major Grant early noticed the importance of the
town and thereafter he labored incessantly to bring about its capture by
the Americans. Finally, on the 18th, he succeeded in getting a fleet of
gunboats, launches and cascos headed that way. Captain Pratt and
Lieutenant Franklin attempted to make a landing on the shore in front of
the town, but they failed as the water was too shallow. Five miles
farther up the beach they made a profitable landing at the mouth of the
Pagsanyan river. However, as this was blocked with obstructions of
bamboo and rock, no effort was made to sail up the stream until three
days had elapsed. Then the impediment was removed.

During the time which intervened between the 21st and the 28th little
was done with the exception of attending to some needed repairs on the
boat. On the 28th the gunboat advanced to the south of the Balucan
river, where another delay was caused by the obstructions placed there
by the natives. The country skirting this place was thickly covered with
brush and low trees, very much like bayou. When about a mile and a half
up the stream the enemy opened fire at a range of about 500 yards, which
was returned by the guns on the boat. The fire was heavy and the
insurgents evidently concluded that they were too close for comfort, for
their fire slackened materially in a very short time. The "Laguna de
Bay" and the "Napindan" then came down the stream. As the latter started
to follow the larger boat the pilot was hit in the hand by a bullet and
before he could recover himself the little craft had run aground. When
the "Laguna de Bay" went to her assistance she also struck a bar and was
held fast. The boats were compelled to remain here under fire until the
tide came in and floated them off.

The work of the gunboats was without extraordinary interest until April
8th. On that day the fleet steamed up Pasig with twenty cascos and seven
launches in tow. One thousand five hundred men, with two days' rations,
two light artillery guns and necessary horses, composed the expedition,
which was commanded by General Lawton. Among the troops were detachments
from the Fourth United States Cavalry, the Fourteenth United States
Infantry, the North Dakota, Idaho and Washington volunteers, the Sixth
Artillery and the Signal Corps. This force reached Jalajala on the 9th
and then awaited the arrival of the entire fleet. The place of
advancement and attack--Santa Cruz--was mapped out and then the fleet
steamed ahead. About five miles from Santa Cruz the "Napindan" ran into
a point close to the shore and opened fire. Here the works were
silenced, after which the troops landed. Under cover of the guns of the
"Oeste" other men also disembarked. With Lawton aboard, the "Laguna de
Bay" advanced toward the town approaching to within 300 yards of the
shore. Some troops in cascos were put ashore. After a survey of the
situation the boats went out into deep water and advanced from the
right, while the troops encamped to the west of the town.

The next day a general advance began at daylight. The American forces
came up to the enemy's position and opened fire. This was a signal for
action on the part of the boats and after moving in closer they opened a
heavy fire on the insurgent works. The troops placed south and west
under General Lawton drove the natives northward while those posted
along the shore of the river, aided by the guns on the boats, did
considerable damage. Large bodies of the natives broke for a place of
safety and while attempting to escape through a marshy open field many
of them were killed. Shells actually mowed them down in heaps. By this
time the lines of the infantry had been completely formed for an advance
and the gunboats ceased their work. Shortly afterward our forces took
possession of the town, and a message was received from Lawton saying he
had established his headquarters in the church.

On the 11th the boats steamed up the lake and ran close to the shore
near the mouth of the Pagsanyan river, where they opened fire on the
town of Lumbaog, toward which the land forces were advancing. This fire
was kept up until the infantry reached the place and took it. A message
was received from General Lawton to the effect that he had captured the
town of Pagsanyan; also that six launches had been captured there and
were at the town. The "Cavadonga" at this time sailed up and relieved
the "Oeste." The guns were on the hills north of Orani and after a time
the infantry took possession, for a flag from the church tower called
for a boat to be sent to that place. The "Laguna de Bay" responded, went
up the river and shelled Paite and Sinilaon until darkness ended her
usefulness for that day. The troops had in the meantime checked the
native advance and camped at Paite.

From this time until May 7th little was done by the boats. A greater
part of the time was spent in making necessary repairs. On the last
mentioned date a Macabebe named Soteros Gatdula reported for duty as
pilot, and under his direction the fleet steamed across the bay to the
mouth of the Rio Grande. Passing up this stream the boats shelled the
towns of Guagua and Sexmoan. At the former place a fire had been started
and a launch in the river was observed to be in flames. A party was sent
out to try to save this craft, but she proved to be of little value and
the attempt was abandoned. Two Spaniards claiming to have been held as
prisoners by the natives, and a Filipino suspect were taken aboard.

It was decided early in May to make an effort to pierce the waters of
the Rio Grande de Pampanga, which leads to Calumpit and beyond far into
the heart of the enemy's country. The first efforts to search out the
channel were made by the "Cavadonga" on May 9th. Soteros Gatdula, a
Macabebe pilot, was directed by General Otis to undertake the task and
the "Cavadonga" started on the cruise into the unknown waters early in
the morning. Near the mouth of the river the boat suddenly went aground,
and when the tide rose, and early in the day the boat was joined by the
"Laguna de Bay." The channel was then located by the Macabebe and there
was no further difficulty in forcing a passage up the wide waters of the
river, the largest on Luzon Island. For a long distance up the river the
territory is occupied by the Macabebes, the ancient and traditional
enemies of the Tagalan race. A large crowd of these friendly natives was
on the shores of the river as the boats passed up and they filled the
air with cheers and cries of "Viva los Americanos," which the soldiers
replied to in variegated and wonderfully woven Filipino phrases. One
obstruction was met in the river consisting of cocoanut poles, but the
Macabebes assisted in removing these from the path of the boats. Without
having fired a shot, early in the afternoon the boats arrived at
Calumpit, where troops of the infantry were stationed.

On May 14th the "Cavadonga" was sent out on a reconnoitering expedition
up the river. On the way up Sexmoan and Apilit were passed, and it was
observed that all the natives fled from the river as soon as the gunboat
approached. The country is heavily timbered on both sides of the river,
and there was no evidence of a hostile attitude on the part of the
natives until the boat swung round the curve leading to San Luiz. Almost
through the entire distance the shores were lined with Filipino
intrenchments, but it was discovered that these were unoccupied.
Lieutenant Webb was out on the bow capstan, entirely unsheltered by the
meagre 3-16-inch armor with which the craft was encased. Just as a curve
was rounded in front of San Luiz a long line of straw hats and the bores
of fifty rifles were seen facing the boat from the port side, no more
than fifty yards away. Lieutenant Webb was scanning the opposite shore
with his glasses, when the lookout discovered the enemy on the port
side. Sergeant Ford Fisher called out a sudden warning to the Lieutenant
and reached out towards him. Just then the volley came. Fisher reeled
backward with a bullet piercing his brain. Instantly the bow one-pounder
and the Gatling gun on the port side tore the Filipino intrenchments.
Bullets pelted fast against the slight armor of the cruiser. Fred
Mitchell, one of the men at the Gatling gun, was wounded in the hand.
The "Cavadonga" turned round almost where it stood and slowly moved
back, and during a wonderful skirmish in which the native and American
frequently fired in each other's faces at a range of twenty yards, raked
the Filipino works with the fast-firing machine guns. The fighting only
lasted thirty minutes.

When it was over Ford Fisher, who was still breathing, was placed on
board the "Oceania," which had remained about two hundred yards in the
rear during the fighting, and almost at the moment he was laid on the
craft he expired. The "Oceania" sped quickly down the river with the
dead body of the Sergeant, but frequently the "Cavadonga" stopped to
suppress the desultory fire from the natives who had fled during the
early part of the action. It was learned afterwards from the "padre" at
San Luiz that fifty insurgents had been killed during the engagement,
and when the Utah men arrived there a few days later a long line of new
graves in the walled cemetery told a tragic story of the ending of the
fight.

On the evening of this day the Seventeenth Regular Infantry and a
battalion of the Ninth Infantry advanced up the Rio Grande from Calumpit
over the old Apilit road under the leadership of Major Kobbe of the
Third United States Artillery. Early the next morning the "Laguna de
Bay" and "Cavadonga" started up the river and most of the way kept
within view of the troops on the shore. Occasionally the gunboats moved
ahead and daring scouts could be seen calmly looking into vacated
Filipino intrenchments. The enemy was encountered several times along
the shore as far as San Luiz and all intrenchments were bombarded by the
"Laguna de Bay" some distance to prevent a repetition of the disastrous
surprise of the day before. When San Luiz was neared white flags could
be seen floating everywhere, and on arriving there it was discovered
that the whole body of insurgents had disappeared into the interior. The
boats remained at this position during the night, and early the next
morning resumed the advance ahead of the infantry up the waters of the
Pampanga. During this journey large numbers of Filipinos were met in
cascos with their families and all their earthly possessions, making
their way down the stream. About noon the boats reached Candaba without
a hostile shot having been fired during the whole day. Here Major Grant
was met by the Mayor of the city, who stated that he had forced the
soldiers to evacuate in order to prevent the bombardment of the town and
the subsequent loss of life among the people of whom he was guardian. An
evidence of the hasty departure of the natives was found upon entering
the town, for a guard list giving the names of the officers and
enlisted men of the guard was found posted on the walls of the town
hall.

This ended the fighting record of the gunboats under a Utah commander.
From this period until June 24th the boats were utilized in carrying
supplies and towing soldiers, laden cascos and wounded men up and down
the Pampanga. On May 24th the rebel commissioners, General Gregoria del
Pilar and Colonel Actia, who had gone to Manila to negotiate peace with
General Otis after the crushing defeat of the insurgents at Calumpit,
were taken on the gunboats and conveyed as far as Candaba. They had
expressed a wish to go by way of the gunboats, as they had no desire to
cross the insurgents' lines at San Fernando because General Luna was in
command at that place and there was strife between the two Generals.
Pilar showed great interest in the armament of the "Laguna" and said he
would give all his wealth for one of the three-inch guns. The "Oceania"
was sent ahead with instructions to all the commanding officers to make
as large a display as possible. At San Luiz the instructions were not
complied with and as the "Laguna" passed one officer and four men were
falling in for guard. General Gregoria smiled. Farther up the river the
case was different. Where they were in the habit of posting but one
guard there was an officer and twenty men. This was repeated at all the
other stations until Candaba was reached. General Gregoria's smile had
faded, and he remarked that the Americans kept the country better
patrolled than he had imagined. The General and Colonel were landed at
Candaba and under an escort of Americans disappeared in the distant
green line of woods.

On May 24th it was known among all the Utah men that their days of
fighting were over, and on this date Major Grant was relieved of his
command of the river boat fleet. And so ended, for Utah, the career of
these wonderful ironclad river machines.




CHAPTER V.

THE HOME COMING.


While the fighting Utah batterymen were still living in the nipa huts at
San Fernando and Baliaug and repelling the attacks of the dusky Tagalan
braves at Candaba and Morong from General Otis an order came to the
Cuartel. It had an unpretentious look--that slip of paper; but it
carried a message of great importance to the belligerent Utahn than any
he had received since the thunders of war shook the earth on the night
of February 4th. It told the artilleryman to gather all his portable
utensils and board the United States transport "Hancock," which lay idly
in the bay waiting orders to weigh anchor and steam for America.

Almost a week passed before the scattered batteries were assembled
within the familiar walls of the Cuartel. The main body at San Fernando
turned over its guns to the famous Third Artillery and arrived safely at
the quarters over the Manila and Dagupan railroad; Lieutenant Seaman's
detachment at Baliaug dropped its war machinery and made all possible
speed to Manila; Lieutenant Webb's detail on the "Cavadonga" for the
first time turned its back on the enemy and fled for the protecting
walls of the barracks. When these battle-begrimed veterans reached the
quarters there was such a demonstration as the old walls had never seen
before. The old scenes of order disappeared, the rigors of discipline
were relaxed, and chaos reigned. Everything was made subservient to the
one all-absorbing topic, "Home." The sturdy soldier doffed his war
attire and donned his peaceful garb. The renowned Utah band paraded the
streets in holiday dress and, with the blare of brass, proclaimed the
happy news to the nut-brown maid. The stalwart warriors danced and sang
to the music of that soul-lifting song, "A Hot Time in the Old Town
Tonight." The jubilant battle hero collected his ordnance and other war
trappings and handed them over to the ordnance officer while he
exchanged looks of mutual doubt and suspicion with that important
personage. The weary and worn Utahn bade adieu to the dreamy-eyed damsel
of the East with many expressions of fond attachment and love; then
mustered his heterogeneous troop of relics and curiosities and joined
the Nebraska regiment on the "Hancock." Two days later the officers
steamed over from the gay apartments of the "Baltimore" in a brightly
decorated launch and walked aboard the big boat. Finally a goodly supply
of canned beef and antiquated swine were hoisted on the vessel and the
Captain gave orders for the sailing flag to be put to the breeze. This
was on July 1st.

When the official contingent was safely housed in spacious staterooms it
was learned that quite a change had taken place in the roster of that
worthy body. The shoulders of Captain Grant were adorned with the gold
leaf of a Major; Lieutenant Critchlow had been elevated to a Captaincy;
Lieutenant Naylor wore the single bar of a First Lieutenant, and First
Sergeant John A. Anderson of Battery B shone in the glowing uniform of a
Second Lieutenant. Major Young sent a letter bidding farewell to the
Utahns and expressing his disappointment at not being able to accompany
the batteries home.

The batteryman entertained no high opinion of the Government transport.
He had become acquainted with the luxuries which Uncle Sam provides the
defenders of his broad acres. He had already learned how elaborately the
American Government furnishes apartments for its soldiers and food for
its larder. So, after he had landed safely on the main deck and
deposited his knapsack and monkeys, he was not surprised when the order
came for him to take his goods and chattels and repair to the forward
hold. He entered the gangway and descended four flights of stairs
without any misgiving or hesitation. He threaded his way through the
labyrinthian passage of his subaqueous home with a skill equal to that
displayed by the blind fish of the Mammoth Cave. He beheld the
wonderfully constructed bunks which glowed specter-like in the
semi-darkness without evincing the least disappointment. Later when one
of these had been assigned as his sole property during the voyage he
accepted it and its diminutive proportions without a murmur and
philosophically concluded that the Government either thought he had
diminished in stature while on the islands or intended to reduce his
dimensions on the way home. Thus the Utah warrior was quartered. The
celerity with which he adapted himself to his environments clearly
exhibited his excellent training. He quickly disposed of the problem of
how to shorten his linear measurements to four feet eight inches by
placing himself diagonally across his bed. The posture thus assumed was
not unlike that of a "Skeleton in Armor." When his joints became cramped
he straightened himself out by throwing his soles against the head of
his neighbor, who instantly developed a remarkable vocabulary of
explosives anent Hades, Paradise, Satan, etc.

Mess time on the "Hancock" was not an occasion of the greatest felicity
to the returning volunteers. Their epicurean tastes could not totally
harmonize with bogus coffee and cows that had a flavor strangely akin to
that of horse flesh. When the bugle shrilly proclaimed the dinner hour
the men formed in a long serpentine line and displayed their skill in
keeping their equilibrium and at the same time holding their place in
the procession. The rattle of Government tinware, upon which the soldier
had inscribed many strange hieroglyphics descriptive of his adventures,
served as a musical entertainment in lieu of the melody furnished at all
other times by the combined efforts of the Utah and Nebraska bands. They
facetiously derided the commissary sergeant who had long since become
calloused to all sneering remarks made by the ordinary defender of the
flag; for in case of any exceedingly hostile demonstration he was armed
with a long cleaver and several carefully concealed bolos. They made
comments, too, not at all flattering to the bill of fare, about "gold
fish" and "slum-gullion" and ancient swine, but they "wasted their venom
on a file." The cooks, also, came in for a share of the complimentary
criticisms, for they were not blessed with a superabundance of skill in
the culinary art. Occasionally the voice of a volunteer was raised in
loud-mouthed protest over the meagerness of his own supply of food and
the apparent excessiveness which adorned the plate of his associate.
This always ended in a peculiar panegyric on the merits of a person who
had a "stand in" or a "pull" with the officers. When the ravenous Utahn
was handed his cheer the bestower very kindly warned him not to taste or
smell the victuals, as such an act would be attendant with serious
injury to his appetite; so he merely devoured the contents of his plate
with his eyes and passed them on to his gastronomical organs with no
further ceremony.

A small portion of the forward deck was allotted to the batteries to be
used as a messhall, lounging apartment, etc. It was here the
battle-scarred veterans collected at meal times and dispatched their
slender store. As the Pacific is not always so peaceful as its name,
this pleasing task was not at all times accomplished with ease. When on
a boat tipped to an angle of 60 degrees, a Japanese juggler would find
some difficulty in conjuring his body to remain in an upright position
and simultaneously inducing a seething plate of soup to abide in a
placid state; yet the uninitiated volunteers contrived to perform this
daring feat three times a day. The many strange figures which they
described in their endeavors to execute these occult tricks would have
done justice to the most skillful acrobat. Frequently, as the vessel
gave an extra lurch, the insecure warrior proceeded with all possible
speed to the side of the boat and deposited his food and eating utensils
on the surface of the sad sea waves amid the execrations of those whom
he had the good fortune to come in contact with on his hasty trip and
the jibes of his appreciative audience. At this same place the
mendacious batterymen gathered in the warm afternoons to tell sea
serpent legends and fairy stories about some great event which had never
happened in the trenches. When this supply had been exhausted they began
forthwith to dilate upon the virtues of the most famous officers until
those worthies would have been unable to recognize their own characters
had they been confronted with them in their garnished garb. Once in a
very great while an officer strolled down from the aristocratic
atmosphere of the saloon dining hall and watched the feeding of the
enlisted drove with a superior grace. To convince the famished soldiers
that they were getting a redundant quantity of food, he sometimes called
for a [text missing in original.] There was always a good heap of hash
left to show the astonished men that they were merely chronic kickers.
Then the well-fed comedian adjourned to his spacious saloon and offered
an apology to his offended stomach by supplying it with an abundance of
all that the steamer carried.

The one great comfort to the fagging spirits of the Utahn was the
battery fund. Through the darkest days of war his dying hopes were
revived by visions of what the future held in store for him by the aid
of this phantom. It was to the despairing volunteer what mirage is to
the thirsty traveler of the desert. The fund represented the combined
contributions of the soldiers, benevolent persons and charitable
institutions. Besides this a fabulous sum was added by the artillery
canteen which exchanged beer for the Utes' money and, in addition to
what it contributed towards the battery fund, provided turkeys and
succotash for the Thanksgiving and Christmas banquets. When it was
announced that this enormous sum was to be expended for dainties on the
way home the joy of the batteryman knew no limits. Spectre dinners of
mutton, cakes and pies arose in his mind with a suddenness that would
have startled the most ardent disbeliever in ghosts. Without the aid of
Pluto he called up all the spirits of meals long dead and fed on them
till the marvelous distribution should take place. And it was not long
in coming. One morning, accompanied by the stentorian voice of the bugle
Judge Williams, heavily laden with a huge cargo of jam, hove in sight.
Then were many whispered comments made about the quantity which each man
was to receive. The Judge soon stopped this and shortly after there was
a hum of satisfaction all along the deck as the men made way with this
delicacy. Now the gastronomy of the warrior lived and flourished under
the rigors of army hardtack and navy beans, but it collapsed at once
when introduced to Jamesson's jam. There was a sudden epidemic of cramps
throughout the entire organization, but the ever victorious commissary
sergeant soon stamped this out by the judicious application of some
French mustard, which had been purchased by the battery fund. And thus
the men of Utah were fed.

Meanwhile the swift "Hancock" steamed out of Manila bay and speeded
toward Japan. Two days out she passed the beautiful Island of Formosa,
and in three days more the vessel came in sight of Nagasaki, the leading
coaling station of the Flowery Kingdom. Just at dusk the pilot boarded
the vessel and directed her safely through the narrow channel into the
land-locked harbor. Next morning all the soldiers were given shore leave
for the day and San-pans--the native craft--were provided to take the
men ashore. Here the Utahn explored the country in the jin-rickisha--a
two-wheeled vehicle which is drawn by the cabby himself, who as soon as
he has settled to his satisfaction the price to be paid, ambles off at a
gentle speed. If the Island of Kiusiu appeared beautiful as the boat
approached it in the waning twilight it seemed doubly so in the glory of
the morning sun. It is a land where poetry breathes as freely as the
gentle zephyrs blow from the summit of Mount Olympus; it is a land where
women are as fair as the daughters of Niobe. The pretty terraced hills
adorned with Pagan temples are rich in the odor of the spice and pine;
the pellucid lakes and bays gather a silver purity from the very crest
of the mountain; and as one gazes upon this beauty and simple grandeur
he imagines that it was just such influences as these that stirred the
soul of Hellas when she pictured Aphrodite springing out of the sea or
Neptune riding in his chariot of shells with a gay company of Tritons
and Nymphs. Three days, owing to a raging typhoon, the vessel was
delayed in coaling, but after the storm had spent its force the coaling
was resumed and the transport put to sea. On the 11th the ships arrived
at Muji, the key to the southern end of the inland sea. Here Japan's
military power is fully shown. Huge guns bristle from every hill, dark
warships stud the clear waters of the ocean and soldiers deck the peaks.
The sharp green cliffs in the inland sea chop off into the water and
from every one of these of any importance a cannon menacingly points.
Both entrances to the place are controlled by powerful fortresses which
command the open sea for a distance of twelve miles. In such a way has
the Mikado prepared for any war emergency. Two days after sighting Muji
the "Hancock" dropped anchor in the harbor of Yokahama. The visit here
lasted three days, during which the Utahns took a trip to Tokio and saw
of what the outside wall of the Emperor's palace is composed. At
Yokahama the batterymen spent the time in visiting the European portion
of the town and learning all they could about the flavor of the Japanese
foods. On the 16th the vessel lifted her ponderous anchor and pointed
her prow eastward.

The only exciting incident during the entire voyage happened at
Nagasaki, when the first officer attempted to use corporal punishment on
the ship's quartermaster who had been ashore and in addition to getting
drunk had succeeded in breaking his kneepan. While he was getting his
wound attended to in the ship's hospital the big burly mate descended
the gangway and struck him a violent blow in the face. Not content with
this brutal treatment the monster had the poor wretch placed in irons
and dragged up the ship's ladder. Just as this procession landed on the
upper deck the soldiers rose unto a man and stopped the performance amid
cries of "throw him overboard." Surprised and astounded at this
interference the worthy officer demanded of the mob if they knew they
were mutinying. To which several of the leaders answered they knew not
under what legal nomenclature such a demonstration could be classed but
that they would carry out their threat to the letter if the castigation
should proceed. At this the cowed dignitary retreated in haste to the
security of his cabin.

The "Hancock" was generally regarded as a fast boat. This may have been
true twenty years before the Nebraskans and Utahns boarded her, but
there were those who doubted the truth of such an assertion. During her
infancy on the Atlantic the boat had struck an iceberg and succeeded in
breaking forty feet off her bow. Since then she has been subject to
periodical disturbances in her interior, consequently her owners
patiently awaited the advent of war, knowing that the United States
Government would purchase her for the transport service at an early
opportunity. It is needless to say she eventually found her way into the
Pacific. On leaving Manila it was the intention of the "Hancock" to
break her own record of eighteen days between San Francisco and that
port. Her new record of thirty days had not yet been announced in the
newspapers. As a matter of fact she did happen to break her machinery
and delay the expedition six hours, causing a break in the fond hopes
which the soldiers had built up.

There was one death during the trip over, Richard Ralph of Battery B,
who died at Nagasaki of typhoid fever on the 15th of July. Corporal
George Williams of the same organization was also left at the same point
owing to a severe attack of the dysentery. Both men were Englishmen and
had enlisted at Eureka. Otherwise the health of the batteries was good.

The big prow of the "Hancock" loomed up darkly on the night of the 29th
in San Francisco harbor and rested at anchor. The long sea journey was
over. Until very late that night, long after taps had sounded sharply
over the waters of the harbor, the soldiers clustered around the deck of
the ship, heard the megaphone dialogues between the newspaper tugs and
the transport, and looked with longing eyes and hearts that beat with
joy at the gleaming lights of San Francisco.

Many friends from Utah arrived on tugs during the next day, when the
transport was still in quarantine, and there was a generous greeting
when the transport moved up to the dock on the morning of the 30th. The
whole of this day was spent by the soldiers in exchanging greeting with
friends and in preparing their property for transportation to the
Presidio.

It was on the morning of the 31st that the soldiers were permitted for
the first time to descend from the transport and walk again, after
sixteen months of absence in the Orient, upon the shores of the United
States.

The battalions marched up the streets of San Francisco behind the
veterans of the Nebraska regiment, the center of a tremendous
demonstration. At the Presidio they were given quarters on the slopes to
the left of the Presidio road. The patriotic sentiments and generous
feelings of the citizens had been further shown, as the slopes of the
hills were lined with large Sibley tents, each equipped with a stove as
protection from the chilly mists that creep up by night from the bay.
There were also frame buildings for use as offices and a large kitchen
and mess room, commodiously and thoroughly equipped for comfort and
convenience.

The citizens of Utah in the meantime had been active in preparations for
receiving the native warriors. On August 8th, Adjutant-General Charles
S. Burton and Colonel Bruback, members of the Governor's staff, and
representing the citizens' committee, arrived at the Presidio and used
every effort in providing for the further comfort of the men and
arranging for their early departure to their homes in Utah. It was
learned that a special train had been chartered by the citizens to
convey the volunteers to Utah, and to the fund necessary for this
purpose Collis P. Huntington of the Southern Pacific had contributed
$2500.

The date for the muster out of the Utah troops was fixed by the
headquarters of the Department of California as August 16th, and
notwithstanding the efforts of General Burton and Major Grant to have
this time extended, General Shafter was unable to give an extension of
time. This left but a short period for the immense labor of closing the
affairs of the battery and the intricate details of the muster out. The
Captains of the batteries and a large clerical force were kept working
almost continuously from the day of the arrival at the Presidio, and
late on the night of the 15th they had the gratification, after toilsome
days and sleepless nights, of putting the final touch to the muster out
rolls. The next morning the rolls went to the paymaster. The labors of
the Utah volunteers in the army of the Republic were over.

Some time before this, on August 5th, the men passed the final physical
examination, and the general condition of the command was found to be
extraordinarily good. Then the men were ready for the last function of
muster out.

The next day the paymaster's wagon rattled up the Presidio slope. Then
the soldiers performed the last act of their soldier career. One by one
they marched into the small official frame building where the paymaster
fingered his gold. As the veterans came out, each hand laden with gold,
there was upon each face an iridescent smile, not only because of the
augmented wealth, but for the reason that each one knew that for him the
last bugle call had sounded, that his breast would no longer swell under
the blue of the United States uniform. In two hours the soldiers had all
left the Presidio, officers were shaking hands with the men over the
bridged chasm of official dignity, and up on the slope of the Presidio
the Sibley tents were ransacked and deserted.

That night the men of Utah slept in the hotels of San Francisco and
dreamed of the morrow.

On the night of the 16th the transport "Warren" arrived, bearing among
its passengers Major Richard W. Young, late chieftain of the batteries,
who had come, much to the satisfaction of the men, in time to join his
old war comrades in the homegoing.

The ferry which was to carry the soldiers to Oakland was ready before
noon on the 17th, and early in the afternoon the engine of the special
train gave a few premonitory puffs and the train full of returning
warriors was moving towards Utah. The cars consisted of tourist sleepers
for the men and a buffet Pullman for the officers and their friends.
Across the center car a streamer stretched, bearing the words, "The Utah
Batteries."

Crowds gather at all the stations on the route and cheer the warriors.
There was some delay, but nothing of special import occurred during the
trip.

Early on the 19th the soldiers were able to see for the first time the
towering blue mountains of Utah and the splendor of her sunshine. It was
nearly noon when the train drew up at the Ogden station, and the
soldiers looked out over the heads of a cheering multitude and listened
to shrill whistles signalling a joyous welcome. The reception here only
lasted an hour, but was cordial in the extreme, and out on the Ogden
park a tempting lunch was served by fair women of Ogden. Lieutenant
George A. Seaman, formerly of Ogden, was given an ovation as he stepped
down from the platform of the car. A special car conveying the Governor
and a large party met the volunteers.

Two hours later the jubilation was complete. The volunteers saw at first
a crowd and then a throng. They saw flaming streamers, flags fluttering
and hats waving; they heard the diaphanous shriek of the steam whistles,
the blaring of bands and the din of thousands cheering--all mingled in
one chorus of praise and rejoicing. There were hurried handshakes and
greetings and policemen's voices raised in fierce altercation with the
crowd.

Soon with the cavalrymen and the engineers and the national guardsmen
the batterymen had struggled into line. Horses were in waiting at the
station for the officers and all were mounted in the parade. When the
order to march could be heard through the tumult, the procession moved
through a gayly decked arch at the station, and Majors Young and Grant
rode side by side at the head of the battalion.

The crowd became more dense as the march continued towards Main street,
and as far as Liberty Park thousands thronged the avenues. Excited
relatives made a military formation impossible by rushing into the ranks
to grasp the hand of a veteran.

At the Park the day's ceremonies were held. There were speeches by the
Governor and the two Majors, and here the silver medals which the
Legislature decided should be presented to the fighting sons of the
State were awarded. With the conclusion of the formal exercises, the
volunteers were led to an elaborately prepared lunch on beflowered
tables beneath the shadows of the locust trees, and while refreshments
were being taken fair maidens who ministered at the feast pinned badges
on the breasts of the modest volunteers.

That night the celebration reached its full blazonry. The city glowed
and sparkled; gayly-bedecked, her flaunting colors were aurioled in the
lustres of the night; like an imperial palace, awaiting the return of
victorious princes, the lights gleamed and burned into the darkness; and
in the center a luminous monument, glowing like the smile of an
archangel, stood in vivid brightness the arch of triumph.

When the men of Utah batteries passed out into the darkness that night
from the dazzle of color they knew that the glamor of the victorious
home-coming, the shouts and the jubilation were over. Yet there was
peace in their hearts and on their breast was a badge of honor from a
grateful people. And when they slept that night there were in their
dreams no spectral visions of distant battlefields. All that was
closed.




OFFICERS OF THE BATTERIES.


MAJOR RICHARD W. YOUNG.

[Illustration: MAJOR RICHARD W. YOUNG.]

Major Richard W. Young, who left Utah as the ranking officer of the two
batteries, being at that time Captain of Battery A, and who was
afterward appointed Major commanding the battalion and still later
selected as Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of Manila, is a
native of this State, having been born April 19, 1858, his parents being
Joseph A. Young (deceased), a son of the late Brigham Young, President
of the Mormon Church, and Margaret Whitehead Young, who still survives
her husband.

Major Young is a trained military man, having been educated at the
military academy at West Point. For a time after his graduation he was a
member of the staff of Major-General Hancock, at that time commanding
the Department of the East. Later he acted as Judge-Advocate in the army
and conducted the Swaim court-martial, which was a case celebrated at
that time. He was then transferred to the Third Artillery and stationed
here with his battery at Fort Douglas. He resigned the service to take
up the practice of law, which he engaged in until he was selected as
manager of the Herald, a place which he filled acceptably for some time,
when he again resigned to practice law.

At the outbreak of the war with Spain he tendered his services to the
Government and was later selected by the Governor of Utah to command
Battery A. At Camp Kent he was the ranking officer and had entire charge
of its affairs.

His services in the Philippines were of such a distinguished character
that he was breveted Major by the President and later promoted to the
complete rank.

When the batteries' term of service was nearly completed, he was
designated by Major-General Otis as Associate Justice of the Supreme
Court of Manila and came home with the volunteers to enjoy a vacation.

Major Young is the author of a standard work on military law written
while he was a Lieutenant in the regular army. He is an able young man
and one well liked and respected. He is exceedingly popular here in this
city and State and outside of it.

His married life has been very happy. Eight children have been born to
him and Mrs. Young, seven of whom are living.


MAJOR FRANK A. GRANT.

[Illustration: MAJOR FRANK A. GRANT.]

Frank A. Grant, who went away from Salt Lake City with the bars of a
Captain, came home with the gold leaves of a Major in his shoulder
strap. He is not a native of this State, but was born in Kingston,
Ontario, forty-four years ago. He received his education at the
military college of his native city and graduated therefrom. After
leaving school he came to the United States, where he became a citizen,
and settling at Detroit was engaged by one of the large steamship
companies in the capacity of pilot. He was a well trained man in his
business and followed the occupation for a period of ten years. He has
lived in Utah for ten years. During that time he was engaged in real
estate and insurance business, in both of which he made great successes.

At the time of the breaking out of hostilities he was a member of the
National Guard of Utah, being Colonel of the First Infantry. Previous to
this time he had held a position as staff officer on the brigade
commander's staff, and was always a valuable man in military matters. It
was due principally to his efforts that Troop C was organized in this
city and made a success.

Governor Wells commissioned him as Captain of Battery B, and with that
rank he went into the field. Like Major Young he was breveted by the
President for distinguished service and later was promoted to the full
rank of Major, coming home in command of the battalion.

As commander of the river fleet Major Grant performed excellent service,
his expedition up the Rio Grande de Pampanga being especially well
carried out. Since his return he has gone into his old business--that of
insurance--and expresses himself as having had enough of military life.
He is married and has six children.


CAPTAIN E.A. WEDGEWOOD.

[Illustration: CAPTAIN E.A. WEDGEWOOD.]

Captain E.A. Wedgewood, who was promoted to the command of Battery A
after the promotion of Major Young, left the State as First Lieutenant
of Battery B. He is a native of Massachusetts, about forty years of age
and an attorney-at-law, being the junior partner of the firm of Rawlins,
Thurman, Hurd & Wedgewood. Immediately prior to his coming to Utah he
had served as Sheriff for several terms in the State of Nebraska. He
selected Provo for his home on coming to Utah and after entering the law
office of George Sutherland in that city and being admitted to the bar,
associated himself with Hon. S.R. Thurman. Later on the present firm was
formed.

Captain Wedgewood was the officer sent back from San Francisco to Utah
to recruit 104 men in order to bring the batteries to their full
strength. Upon returning to San Francisco the party embarked and joined
the commands in Manila.

Captain Wedgewood was a member of the National Guard prior to the time
of his enlistment, being Captain of the Provo company at the State
encampment the year previous. He is said to be a most versatile
character and can do anything from playing the violin to patching a sail
or pleading a case in court. It was expected he would rejoin the
National Guard, but it is learned he has had enough of military honors
and will engage in the practice of his profession with a view to reaping
shekels for use in his old age.


CAPTAIN JOHN F. CRITCHLOW.

[Illustration: CAPTAIN JOHN F. CRITCHLOW.]

Captain John F. Critchlow left the State with the batteries a Second
Lieutenant. He came back here leading Battery B. His promotion was due
to distinguished service performed while abroad. He was specially
recommended for gallantry by Major Young and for coolness on the field
under circumstances of the most trying character.

Captain Critchlow was born in Tonawanda, N.Y., in 1867, and is only 32
years of age. He attended the Rochester University and after graduating
from that institution went to the University of Pennsylvania, where he
studied medicine for several years, graduating in 1894 with the degree
of M.D. For the next year and a half he was in the German hospital at
Philadelphia, where he was enabled to obtain a practical insight into
the mysteries of materia medica, and upon leaving there he came to this
city, where his brother, E.B. Critchlow, a prominent attorney, was
already established in business.

Dr. Critchlow became a member of the National Guard some time after his
arrival, being attached to the medical staff with the rank of First
Lieutenant. He proved to be a valuable and efficient member, always on
the alert and endeared himself to all his associates.

When the call was made for troops he enlisted in Battery B and was made
a Second Lieutenant in that organization.

His services in the Philippines were valuable. On the night attack of
the Spanish it was Lieutenant Critchlow who brought the ammunition to
the firing line at the time when it was most needed. In every place to
which he was assigned he was always at the fore and his conspicuous
bravery was the subject of special commendation, as has been related.
Upon the promotion of Captain Grant to the rank of Major, he was
advanced to that of Captain, coming home in command of the organization
with which he went out as a Second Lieutenant.


LIEUTENANT GEORGE W. GIBBS.

[Illustration: LIEUTENANT GEORGE W. GIBBS.]

First Lieutenant George W. Gibbs of Battery A is a well-known character
in this State, in Montana and in Massachusetts, his old home, where he
was born. His father was a veteran of the War of the Rebellion and
George was a member of the order in Montana, having been department
commander with the rank of colonel. He has always been interested in
matters appertaining to the National Guard; was a member of an infantry
regiment in Massachusetts, a Captain of a troop of cavalry in Montana
and Captain of Battery A, N.G.U., and Major of the battalion at the
outbreak of hostilities with Spain.

He was at one time chief of the fire department in Helena and was a
member of the Salt Lake City department at the time W.A. Stanton was its
chief, being captain of the chemical. He afterwards served as Deputy
Sheriff when Harvey Hardy was at the head of that department.

Gibbs is forty-one years of age and married. Two children, a boy and a
girl, are the result of a union with a most estimable lady.

Prior to coming to this city and before he went to Montana he was in
Colorado, where he was employed as a sheriff's officer, serving with
distinction. He spent some time in San Francisco, where he was in the
employ of one of the leading traction companies.


LIEUTENANT RAYMOND C. NAYLOR.

[Illustration: LIEUTENANT RAYMOND C. NAYLOR.]

Lieutenant Raymond C. Naylor was born in Salt Lake City in 1873. His
early education was received in the public schools of Utah. Later he
attended the University of Utah, from which he graduated with honor. As
a student he took a prominent part in athletics and military training,
being a member of the baseball team as well as captain of one of the
companies of students then taking military drill under Lieutenant
Wright. He afterward taught school for several years and was engaged in
that labor in Centerville when the war broke out. Those who knew him
well were not surprised when he stepped to the front and offered his
service to his country along with others who were willing to brave any
peril in defense of their country's honor. Lieutenant Naylor had long
associated himself with the National Guard, in which he was Captain for
two years. He afterwards was promoted Major and at the breaking out of
hostilities he was filling the office of Assistant Inspector General
with the rank of Lieutenant-Colonel.

When the batteries were organized Governor Wells appointed him a Second
Lieutenant of Battery A, which position he filled with such distinction
that he was promoted First Lieutenant.

As an officer Lieutenant Naylor won the respect and admiration of both
officers and men. His interest in behalf of the privates gained for him
a popularity which was not surpassed by any of the officers in the
batteries.


LIEUTENANT ORRIN R. GROW.

[Illustration: LIEUTENANT ORRIN R. GROW.]

Second Lieutenant Orrin R. Grow, the youngest commissioned officer of
the Utah batteries at the time of their departure for the Philippines,
was born in Salt Lake City October 20, 1873. As a boy he received his
education in the public schools of Salt Lake City and afterwards he
attended the University of Utah several years, but he did not remain
long enough to graduate. While at the University he took military
training under Lieutenant Wright and after leaving that institution he
joined the Denhalter Rifles as bugler. He soon was promoted Sergeant and
subsequently Lieutenant.

When the Denhalters joined the National Guard in 1892 Mr. Grow went with
them and was unanimously chosen captain of Company A, First Infantry,
N.G.U. Later he was chosen Major, a position which he held with credit
until the breaking out of hostilities. His ability was recognized by
Governor Wells, who appointed him a Second Lieutenant of Battery B when
that organization was mustered in. Lieutenant Grow went with his battery
to the Philippines, and during the fighting at Malate distinguished
himself. During January, 1899, he returned home owing to serious
illness. His early departure from the island prevented him from winning
greater honors in the insurrection, as his ability was displayed in the
Spanish-American war.


LIEUTENANT WILLIAM C. WEBB.

[Illustration: LIEUTENANT WILLIAM C. WEBB.]

Along with the many native sons of Utah who joined the ranks in defense
of their country there were some who were born on foreign soil. Such a
man was Lieutenant William C. Webb, who was born in England March 13,
1873. In his early youth Webb attended the schools of his native country
and while he was yet a youth he accompanied his parents when they
emigrated to Utah.

Lieutenant Webb early associated himself with military affairs, as he
was a member of the Denhalter Rifles, and when that organization lost
its identity in the National Guard he became one of the most active
workers in the new service. When Captain Grow of Company A became Major
of the First Battalion, First Infantry, N.G.U., Webb was unanimously
chosen Captain of that company. He held this position until he was
appointed a Second Lieutenant of Battery A by Governor Wells.

When the Utah volunteers left for Manila Lieutenant Webb accompanied
them. He took part in the Malate campaign, where he showed promise of
that brilliant work which he later accomplished in the Filipino
outbreak. At the breaking out of the insurrection he had charge of the
left platoon of Battery A at Santa Mesa hill. His fearlessness and
daring at that place won for him the universal admiration of his men.
Later he was placed in command of the river gunboat "Cavadonga," and
during all the fierce fighting of that little boat he manipulated her
with remarkable skill.

Lieutenant Webb, on account of his exceptional work, was recommended for
a Lieutenancy in the regular army, a position which he will undoubtedly
accept.


LIEUTENANT GEORGE A. SEAMAN.

[Illustration: LIEUTENANT GEORGE A. SEAMAN.]

Lieutenant George A. Seaman, who went away as a Corporal of Battery A,
and came back with the "straps" of a Second Lieutenant, was born in the
little town of Morgan, twenty-nine years ago. While he was yet a boy his
parents moved to Ogden, where he secured the foundation of the education
which was later enlarged upon at the State University. He remained at
that institution four years, graduating with honor in 1892. While
obtaining his mental training he was a member of the University
Battalion, in which organization he acquitted himself so well that his
name was placed upon the honorary roll at Washington. It was also during
his college career that he became acquainted with Miss Lottie Fox,
daughter of Jesse W. Fox. Between them sprang up a mutual attachment,
which was later consummated at the altar. Shortly afterwards Lieutenant
Seaman moved with his wife to Bountiful, where he took up school
teaching as a profession. He showed an efficiency in his work which won
the esteem of all his patrons and pupils. When the call for soldiers was
made his blood was of that order which impelled him to drop the master's
rod and take up the sword in defense of his country.

Having enlisted he set to work to familiarizing himself with all the
tactics pertaining to artillery warfare, and soon made himself
acquainted with military science. His studious habits and his morality
soon commended him to his superior officers who recommended him for the
first vacancy which occurred. He was appointed Second Lieutenant of
Battery B, which position he held with honor until the mustering out of
the battalion.


LIEUTENANT FRANK T. HINES.

[Illustration: LIEUTENANT FRANK T. HINES.]

Lieutenant Frank T. Hines, the son of Mr. and Mrs. Frank L. Hines, was
born twenty-one years ago in Salt Lake City. He attended the city
schools from which he graduated in 1896. For several years thereafter he
was employed at Mercur and later entered the Agricultural College. It
was while at the college that Mr. Hines learned to like the military
life which he subsequently led for a short period.

When the country called for volunteers he enlisted in Captain Grant's
battery as a private, but he was soon appointed duty sergeant. The
latter position he filled very creditably and when a vacancy occurred by
reason of the resignation of Lieutenant Grow, he was elevated to the
Second Lieutenancy, which office he held until the batteries were
discharged.


LIEUTENANT JOHN A. ANDERSON.

[Illustration: LIEUTENANT JOHN A. ANDERSON.]

Lieutenant John A. Anderson, one of the few who worked his way up by
sheer force of ability, was born in Smithfield, Cache county, Utah,
twenty-five years ago. He received his education in the district school
of his native town, and later went to work as a millman, the occupation
which he followed at the breaking out of the war.

When the batteries went away he was a duty sergeant of Battery B, in
which capacity he earned the position which he afterwards secured. It
was Sergeant Anderson who had charge of that section of the Utah
Battalion which accompanied General Lawton in his expedition in the
interior as far as San Isidro. Following his return he was appointed
First Sergeant of Battery B, and just before the organization left the
island he received his commission as second lieutenant. Lieutenant
Anderson was a brave, efficient man, and one who won the respect of all
who knew him.


SERGEANT HARRY A. YOUNG.

[Illustration: SERGEANT HARRY A. YOUNG.]

Sergeant Harry A. Young, son of the late Lorenzo D. Young, was born in
Salt Lake City February 24, 1865. During his boyhood he attended the
public school of his native town, and afterwards he spent several years
in the Utah University, where he evinced a great liking to medicine.
During 1884-85 he filled a mission to the Northern States. Soon after
his return he went East and entered the medical department of Columbia
College. He graduated from this institution with distinguished honors
and great future promise to his profession. He established himself in
Salt Lake City, where he succeeded in building up quite an extensive
practice in a short time. The blood of a patriot flowed through the
veins of Dr. Young and when his country needed his service he cheerfully
joined the ranks and was appointed Quartermaster-Sergeant of Battery A,
a position which he filled with great credit. When the Utah volunteers
embarked for Manila Sergeant Young went with them and took part in the
fighting against the Spaniards. Although his service as a doctor was not
required, Dr. Young was continually in the front administering to the
wants of the wounded men. Subsequently he participated in the fighting
of the Tagalan outbreak, and it was while he was bravely at the front in
search of opportunities to perform deeds of mercy that he met with his
death at the hand of the enemy on February 6, 1899.

Those who were intimately acquainted with Dr. Young knew his sterling
worth and admired his manhood. He ever walked in the path of right,
unmindful of the opinions of the world. What he considered to be his
duty he did with unswerving honesty. He was diligent and studious and
applied himself with untiring energy to his books. As a soldier the
batterymen will remember his unceasing efforts to better their
condition. During the five tedious months of barrack life when others
were idly waiting, he devoted himself to his chosen profession. Had
Sergeant Harry A. Young lived two days longer he would have received his
commission as a surgeon in the United States army.


SERGEANT FORD FISHER.

[Illustration: SERGEANT FORD FISHER.]

Sergeant Ford Fisher, who bravely gave up his life in his country's
defense, was born at Seaford, Delaware, twenty-three years ago. He was
the son of I.M. Fisher of Salt Lake City. At an early age Ford, as he
was better known among his associates, came to Salt Lake City with his
parents. Here he attended the city High School, from which he graduated
with high honors. While at the High School he was noted for his
efficiency in mathematics and here he developed a liking for civil
engineering, which he later studied at the Washington State University.
For some time prior to the breaking out of hostilities with Spain he had
associated himself with the National Guard, and when the President's
call came too much patriotic blood flowed through his veins to admit of
any second appeal, and he enlisted with the batteries.

Major Young soon became acquainted with the young man's military ability
and he was appointed drill sergeant at Camp Kent. When the batteries
departed for the Philippines he went with them and distinguished himself
for his gallantry in the Malate campaign. Later during the insurrection
he took part with the other Utah men in many a fierce conflict with the
insurgents until he was stricken down by the enemy's bullet while
heroically defending his position at San Luiz on May 14, 1899.

The Utah artillerymen remember the stalwart figure of Sergeant Fisher as
it loomed up in the forefront at Santa Mesa, Mariquina and Sexmoan. He
was an inspiration to the wavering spirits of the Utahn in twenty hard
encounters. His voice ever sounded as a note of cheer and his ringing
command never failed to infuse with new life. Always attending to his
duties he expected the same of others; his soul was too great to stoop
to the level of anything base; his heart was honest and open and free.
He was a pleasant companion and a true friend. He was blessed with an
abundance of original humor which made him doubly loved by the soldiers
during the lonely hours of barrack life.

At the time of his death Sergeant Fisher was first in line of promotion,
as he had been recommended for the next commission by Major Young.




ROSTER

BATTALION UTAH LIGHT ARTILLERY, U.S.V.

MAJOR FRANK A. GRANT, Commanding.[1]

BATTERY A.

OFFICERS.

Captain, E.A. WEDGEWOOD                               Salt Lake City
  Wounded April 23, 1899.
First Lieutenant, GEORGE W. GIBBS                     Salt Lake City
Second Lieutenant, WILLIAM C. WEBB                    Salt Lake City
Second Lieutenant, JOHN A. ANDERSON                            Logan

SERGEANTS.

First, JOSEPH O. NYSTROM                              Salt Lake City
Quartermaster, ADNEBYTH L. WILLIAMS                   Salt Lake City
Veterinary, JOHN H. MEREDITH                               Kaysville
EMIL LEHMAN                                           Salt Lake City
EMIL V. JOHNSON                                       Salt Lake City
ARTHUR W. BROWN                                       Salt Lake City
WILLIAM E. KNEAS                                      Salt Lake City
CHARLES R. MABEY                                           Bountiful
MARK E. BEZZANT                                       Pleasant Grove

CORPORALS.

GEO. S. BACKMAN                                       Salt Lake City
NOBLE A. McDONNEL                                     Salt Lake City
WM. JACOBSON                                          Salt Lake City
NELSON E. MARGETTS                                    Salt Lake City
THOMAS COLLINS                                        Salt Lake City
WM. NELSON, JR                                        Salt Lake City
JOHN R. WOOLSEY                                            Kaysville
PETER JENSEN                                                  Newton
SAMUEL HESBURG                                        Salt Lake City
LINDSEY HUDSON                                        Salt Lake City
EDWARD G. WOOD                                                 Logan
LEONARD DUFFIN                                        Salt Lake City
FRANK T. HARMER                                          Springville
THOMAS HOLLBERG                                       Salt Lake City
EDGAR W. STOUT                                              Halliday
WM. T. DENN                                                    Nephi

FARRIERS.

JULIUS W. SORENSEN                                    Salt Lake City
WM. G. McCOMIE                                        Salt Lake City

ARTIFICERS.

BURIAH WILKINS                                             Coalville
HIELE M. MADSON                                             Gunnison

SADDLER.

VICTOR E. MARTHINI                                         Park City

WAGONER.

JAS W. ALLRED                                                Ephraim

MUSICIANS.

ELMER G. THOMAS                                       Salt Lake City
CHARLES W. KROGH                                      Salt Lake City

PRIVATES.

ALDRACH, WILL F.                                          Clear Lake
ANDERSON, JOSEPH F.                                          Ephraim
ANDERSON, LOUIS P.                                           Ephraim
ARCHER, DAVID G.                                      Salt Lake City
BAGGE, JOHN R.                                        Salt Lake City
BEAN, HARRY J.                                        Salt Lake City
BEEMUS, JOHN W.                                             Gunnison
BENSON, PETER J.                                               Provo
BERLIN, JOHN H.                                        American Fork
BOSTWICK, ROBERT L.                                   Salt Lake City
BRADFORD, ARCHIBALD.                                          Murray
BYWATER, CALEB J.                                     Salt Lake City
CAMPBELL, JOHN W.                                     Salt Lake City
CAULKINS, HAROLD L.                                   Salt Lake City
CHRISTENSEN, PARLEY B.                                       Ephraim
CHRISTENSEN, THEODOR                                  Salt Lake City
CURTIS, CLARENCE S.                                   Salt Lake City
DAVIS, DAVID J.                                       Salt Lake City
  Wounded April 23, 1899.
DOTY, GEORGE E.                                             Richmond
DUFFIN, GEORGE                                        Salt Lake City
EARL, WILLIAM                                            Centerville
EDWARDS, WILLIAM                                      Salt Lake City
EKSTRAND, ALFRED                                      Salt Lake City
ELLIS, WILLIAM G.                                     Salt Lake City
EMERY, FRANK W.                                            Park City
ENGLER, GEORGE W.                                              Ogden
FERRIS, EVERETT B.                                    Salt Lake City
FISHER, GEORGE R.                                     Salt Lake City
FRANKENFIELD, GEORGE                                  Salt Lake City
FUNK, EZRA S.                                               Sterling
GILROY, JACK                                          Salt Lake City
GLEDHILL, LEO N.                                            Gunnison
GRIFFITHS, WALTER F.                                  Salt Lake City
GUNN, THOMAS S.                                       Salt Lake City
HARRIS, GEORGE                                        Salt Lake City
HENNEFER, WILLIAM H.                                  Salt Lake City
HOPE, CHESTER J.T.                                    Salt Lake City
HOWELLS, EPHRAIM B.                                        Park City
HUBER, JACOB                                                   Provo
HUGHES, THOMAS J.                                          Park City
HUMPHREY, ANER O.                                        Springville
INGOLDSBY, JOHN E.                                    Salt Lake City
IVINS, JOSEPH C.                                      Salt Lake City
JENICKE, CHARLES G.                                   Salt Lake City
JONES, HENRY O.                                               Newton
KAHN, LOUIS E.                                        Salt Lake City
KEARSLEY, RICHARD.                                    Salt Lake City
KENNER, RAY                                                 Sterling
  Wounded accidentally April 21, 1899.
KIDDER, RALPH                                         Salt Lake City
KING, MURRAY E.                                             Kingston
LARSON, WARREN                                               Ephraim
LEAVER, WILLIAM H.                                    Salt Lake City
  Wounded July 31, 1898.
LEE, JAMES A.                                         Salt Lake City
LOUDER, ARTHUR L.                                              Nephi
LOWRY, ERNEST E.                                            Sterling
LYNGBERG, AUGUST E.                                   Salt Lake City
MEYERS, JOSEPH J.                                     Salt Lake City
MORGAN, JOSEPH H.                                          Park City
MORTENSEN, DAVID                                      Salt Lake City
McKAY, DANIEL                                         Salt Lake City
McLAUGHLIN, WILLIAM F.                                     Park City
NICHOLSON, ANGUS                                      Salt Lake City
NIELSON, JAS. P.                                              Eureka
NIELSON, NIELS                                        Pleasant Grove
NOBLE, GEORGE W.                                      Salt Lake City
OHMER, ARTHUR F.                                    Rawlins, Wyoming
PERRET, WILLIAM E.                                    Salt Lake City
PETERSON, CHARLES                                     Salt Lake City
PETERSON, FRANK C.                                             Ogden
PETERSON LOUIS C.                                     Salt Lake City
PHILLIPS, MANNIE C.                                   Salt Lake City
QUINN, JAMES                                               Park City
RADEMACHER, AUGUST                                             Ogden
RASMUSSEN, SEVEREN                                         Park City
RAUSCHER, EDWARD W.                                            Nephi
RICHMOND, WILLIAM                                              Provo
ROBINSON, WILLIAM J.                                       Park City
ROBISON, JOHN L.                                      Pleasant Grove
RYAN, MICHAEL F.                                      Salt Lake City
RYVER, WILLIAM A.                                     Salt Lake City
SELMER, EMIL F.                                       Salt Lake City
  Wounded April 26, 1899.
SLEATER, HAROLD E.                                    Salt Lake City
SMITH, THOMAS R.                                               Logan
SORENSON, HANS                                        Salt Lake City
SORENSON, JOSEPH F.                                   Salt Lake City
SORENSON, KNUD                                                Eureka
STATEN, STANLEY                                          Springville
STOUT, CHARLES S.                                     Salt Lake City
TIPTON, WILLIAM                                          Springville
TOMPKINS, ODELL D.                                     Mystic, Conn.
TRIPP, FRANCIS B.                                     Salt Lake City
VINCENT, FRANK A.                                     Salt Lake City
WALQUIST, CHARLES A.                                  Salt Lake City
WEBER, GEORGE E.                                           Park City
WILLIAMS, ALBERT R.                                   Salt Lake City
WONNACOTT, JAMES E.                                   Salt Lake City
WYCHERLEY, SAMUEL A.                                  Salt Lake City
ZAHLER, JOHN F.                                            Bountiful

[Footnote 1: Major Richard W. Young, who originally commanded the
battalion, resigned to become Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of
the Philippines and Major Frank A. Grant superceded him as commander of
the batteries.]

HONORABLY DISCHARGED.

First Sergeant, D.H. WELLS                            Salt Lake City
  October 31, 1898.
Sergeant, A.L. ROBINSON                                 Mt. Pleasant
  April 3, 1899.
Corporal, WILLARD CALL                                     Bountiful
  December 14, 1898.
Corporal, LEWIS P. HANSON                             Salt Lake City
  June 28, 1899.
Corporal, WM. D. RITER                                Salt Lake City
  October 31, 1898.
Corporal, JOHN B. ROGERS                              Salt Lake City
  June 29, 1899.
Corporal, GEO. A. SEAMAN                                   Bountiful
  November 24, 1898.
Corporal, FRANK B. SHELLY                             Salt Lake City
  June 28, 1899.
Farrier, W.M. CLAWSON                                      Kaysville
  May 18, 1899.
Farrier, H.P. HANSEN                                  Salt Lake City
  June 28, 1899.
Artificer, V.A. SMITH                                 Salt Lake City
  June 28, 1899.
Private, ETHAN E. ALLEN                               Salt Lake City
  June 28, 1899.
Private, WM. W. BURNETT                               San Jose, Cal.
  February 24, 1899.
Private, A.C. CAFFALL                                 Salt Lake City
  July 7, 1899.
Private, THEO. CLEGHORN                               Salt Lake City
  May 11, 1899.
Private, JAS. W. CONNELL                              Salt Lake City
  April 10, 1899.
Private, A.H. FICHTNER                                Salt Lake City
  June 28, 1899.
Private, P.B. FREDERICKSON                                    Eureka
  June 28, 1899.
Private, GEORGE GRANTHAM                               American Fork
  June 28, 1899.
Private, JOSEPH J. HOLBROOK                                Bountiful
  December 14, 1898.
Private, ELMER JOHNSON                                Salt Lake City
  June 28, 1899
Private, J.B. LICKLEDERER                             Salt Lake City
  July 7, 1899.
Private, HERBERT L. MEYERS                       San Francisco, Cal.
  June 28, 1899.
Private, ISAAC E. LITTRELL                            Berkeley, Cal.
  June 28, 1899.
Private, THEODORE NEWMAN                              Salt Lake City
  April 10, 1899.
Private, FRANK E. PETERS                              Salt Lake City
  June 28, 1899.
Private, W.I. ROWLAND                                 Salt Lake City
  February 1, 1899.
Private, ISAAC RUSSELL                                Salt Lake City
  January 18, 1899.
Private, BISMARCK SNYDER                                   Park City
  December 14, 1898.
Private, A.L. THOMAS, JR.                             Salt Lake City
  June 12, 1898.
Private, JOHN A. TILSON                               Salt Lake City
  June 28, 1899.
Private, FRANCIS TUTTLE                                    Bountiful
  September 21, 1898.
Private, CHAS. E. VARIAN                              Salt Lake City
  December 14, 1898.
Private, E.P. WALKER                                  Salt Lake City
  June 28, 1899.




ROLL OF HONOR.

KILLED IN ACTION.

Quartermaster-Sergeant, HARRY A. YOUNG                Salt Lake City
  February 6, 1899.
Sergeant, FORD FISHER                                 Salt Lake City
  May 14, 1899.
Corporal, JOHN G. YOUNG                               Salt Lake City
  February 5, 1899.
Private, WILHELM G. GOODMAN                           Salt Lake City
  February 5, 1899.

DIED OF DISEASE.

Corporal, GEORGE O. LARSON                                     Dover
  December 10, 1898.
Corporal, JOHN T. KENNEDY                                  Park City
  March 15, 1899.
Private, OSCAR A. FENINGER                                 Park City
  June 5, 1899.
Private, CHARLES PARSONS                              Salt Lake City
  April 20, 1899.

BATTERY B.

OFFICERS.

Captain, JOHN F. CRITCHLOW                            Salt Lake City
First Lieutenant, RAYMOND C. NAYLOR                   Salt Lake City
Second Lieutenant, GEORGE A. SEAMAN                        Bountiful
  Wounded April 11, 1899.
Second Lieutenant, FRANK T. HINES (Batt. Adjt.)       Salt Lake City

SERGEANTS.

First, JOHN U. BUCHI                                           Provo
Quartermaster, JAMES K. BURCH                                  Ogden
Veterinary, FELIX BACHMAN                                      Provo
LOUIS N. FEHR                                         Salt Lake City
ROBERT STEWART                                            Plain City
JOHN A. BOSHARD                                                Provo
GEORGE B. WARDLAW                                              Ogden
  Wounded February 4, 1899.
ANDREW PETERSON, JR.                                           Manti
  Wounded March 11, 1899.
HARVEY DUSENBERRY                                              Provo

CORPORALS.

JAMES J. RYAN                                                 Mercur
CHARLES C. CLAPPER                                            Mercur
THEODORE L. GENTER                                    Salt Lake City
NEPHI OTTESON                                                  Manti
HENRY L. SOUTHER                                              Mercur
  Wounded March 24, 1899.
DON C. JOHNSON                                           Springville
FRANK H. COULTER                                               Ogden
JAS. W. MERANDA                                               Eureka
JAMES M. DUNN                                                 Tooele
JNO. FLANNIGAN                                               Mammoth
RICHARD L. BUSH                                                Logan
GEORGE WILLIAMS                                       Salt Lake City
FRANK J. UTZ                                                  Mercur
STEPHEN BJARNSON                                        Spanish Fork
PHILLIP SCHOEBER                                              Salina
WILLARD H. FARNES                                     Salt Lake City
FRANK WICKERSHAM                                      Salt Lake City

ARTIFICERS.

FRANK DILLINGHAM                                              Eureka
LEE A. CURTIS                                                  Ogden

WAGONER.

ANTONE LITJEROTH                                               Provo

MUSICIANS.

JOSEPH WESSLER

MORTON T. GOODWIN                                         Heber City

PRIVATES.

ABPLANALP, JOHN D.                                             Heber
  Wounded April 24, 1899.
ACKARET, MAHLON H.                                             Ogden
ALEXANDER, ROBERT                                     Salt Lake City
ANDERSON, DAVID M.                                          Peterson
ANDERSON, PETER                                            Richfield
AUSTIN, BERT W.                                              Bingham
BAKER, JOHN                                                   Eureka
BEESLEY, JOHN W.                                               Provo
BENZON, GLENN                                         Salt Lake City
BILLINGS, CLAUD G.                                            Eureka
BJARNSON, EINER                                         Spanish Fork
BORKMAN, ARTHUR                                               Mercur
BRAMAN, JOHN                                                 Bingham
  Wounded April 26, 1899.
BRIDGMAN, JOHN D.                                     Salt Lake City
BURTON, RAY S.                                        Salt Lake City
CARR, JOSEPH W.                                                Ogden
CARLSON, GUST                                         Salt Lake City
CHAMBERLIN, VIRGIL L.                                          Ogden
CHATLIN, EUGENE                                          Castle Gate
CHAFFIN, MILLARD                                      Salt Lake City
CHRISTENSEN, THEODORE                                 Salt Lake City
COLLETT, RALPH                                        Salt Lake City
COLLINS, WM. J.                                       Salt Lake City
CONOVER, ROBT. F.                                              Provo
CORAY, DON R.                                                  Provo
CRAGER, FRED H.                                       Salt Lake City
DALGETY, JOHN                                                 Eureka
DALIMORE, PHILLIP                                               Lehi
DUNCAN, ELMER                                                  Heber
DECKER, LEO                                           Salt Lake City
DOYLE, JOSEPH                                                Mammoth
DUNNING, DANIEL A.                                             Provo
EDDY, LOUIS B.                                                Eureka
ELLIS, ALFRED                                            Silver City
EVANS, WILLARD                                        Salt Lake City
FOWLER, GEORGE                                        Salt Lake City
FORCELAND, CHARLES G.                                 Salt Lake City
GRAVES, NED C.                                        Salt Lake City
GREEN, LOREN C.                                        American Fork
HALL, PARKER J.                                                Ogden
  Wounded March 25, 1899.
HALL, WALTER S.                                         West Portage
HARDIE, FRANCIS R.                                    Salt Lake City
HEATHERLY, CHARLES                                    Salt Lake City
HERBERTZ, PETER                                          Castle Gate
HOGAN, JOHN                                                    Ogden
HAGGAN, THOMAS A., JR.                                         Manti
HOLDAWAY, PARLEY P.                                            Provo
HOBKINS, EVERITT E.                                            Provo
HUBERT, WELMER E.                                     Salt Lake City
HUGHES, JOHN W.                                               Eureka
JENSEN, HANS                                               Hyde Park
KELL, JOHN V.                                                 Eureka
KLENKE, HENDRECH                                      Salt Lake City
KING, SAMUEL                                                  Eureka
KNAUSS, WM. G.                                        Salt Lake City
LARSEN, G.R.                                                   Manti
LAWSON, D.V.                                                  Joseph
LEONARD, THOMAS                                               Eureka
LEWIS, SAMUEL C.                                      Salt Lake City
MARTIN, FRED S.                                       Salt Lake City
McCABE, JAMES                                                 Eureka
McCARTY, LEONARD                                               Manti
McCUBBIN, WILLIAM                                     Salt Lake City
MOIR, GEORGE                                          Salt Lake City
MORTON, JOHN W.                                                Provo
MORTON, MILTON                                                 Provo
NEILSON, ANDREW P.                                      Spanish Fork
NORRIS, JOHN D.                                     Denver, Colorado
OLSEN, PETER                                                   Logan
OLSEN, REINHART                                               Milton
PENNINGTON, LOUIS P.                                         Brigham
PRATT, ERNEST M.                                      Salt Lake City
QUICK, MARSHALL                                                Provo
RAE, ALEX                                                      Provo
RAE, WILLIAM                                                   Provo
REEDALL, THOMAS                                       Salt Lake City
REES, GEORGE                                             Silver City
REID, ROBERT                                          Salt Lake City
ROBERTS, EDWARD J.                                    Salt Lake City
ROWLAND, GEORGE E.                                            Eureka
SAVAGE, WM. H.                                                Eureka
SCHAUPP, FREW W.                                              Eureka
SCOTT, HYRUM C.                                                Provo
SHEARER, WM. H.                                       Salt Lake City
SMITH, JEROME                                                 Tooele
SMITH, SIDNEY J.                                      Salt Lake City
SMITH, HARRY                                          Salt Lake City
SNOW, JUNIUS C.                                                Provo
SNYDER, HARRY S.                                               Provo
TATE, JNO. P.                                                 Tooele
TAYLOR, GEORGE                                                Eureka
TURNER, MORONI                                                 Heber
TYREE, SAMUEL P.                                               Ogden
VANCE, JOHN R.                                                Eureka
VAN SYCKLE, BENJ.                                              Ogden
WALTERS, ALBERT N.                                             Ogden
WALTERS, JOSEPH W.                                             Ogden
WINKLER, JOSEPH G.                                    Salt Lake City
WRIGHT, WILLIAM A.                                    Salt Lake City
YATES, JAMES K.                                              Diamond
WHEELER, GEORGE                                                Ogden
ZOLLINGER, JOHN D.                                        Providence

HONORABLY DISCHARGED.

Second Lieutenant, ORRIN R. GROW                      Salt Lake City
First Sergeant, J.A. ANDERSON                                  Logan
  Discharged June 29, to accept commission as Second Lieutenant.
Quartermaster-Sergeant, CHAS. ASPLUND                       Fairview
  June 23, 1899.
Sergeant, ALBERT ST. MORRIS                           Salt Lake City
  June 28, 1899.
Sergeant, HORACE E. COOLIDGE                                   Manti
  March 22, 1899.
Corporal, WM. Q. ANDERSON                                      Logan
  Wounded August 24, 1898.
  December 15, 1898.
Corporal, JOHN T. DONNELLAN                           Salt Lake City
  March 17, 1899.
Corporal, JACOB A. HEISS                              Salt Lake City
  December 1, 1898.
Corporal, E.V. DE MONTALVO                                    Mercur
  January 21, 1899.
Musician, JOS. F. GRANT                               Salt Lake City
  January 11, 1899.
Saddler, LOUIS MILLER                                          Ogden
  November 15, 1898.
Farrier, FRED D. SWEET                                         Ogden
  April 11, 1899.
Private, GODFREY J. BLUTH                                      Ogden
  February 12, 1899.
Private, F.D. CHATTERTON                              Salt Lake City
  January 21, 1899.
Private, JASPER D. CURTIS                                     Eureka
  June 23, 1899.
Private, ROSEY P. FLORANCE                                     Ogden
  December 30, 1898.
Private, CHARLES S. HILL                                  Wellington
  June 28, 1899.
Private, BARR W. MUSSER                               Salt Lake City
  January 17, 1899.
Private, JOHN A. PENDER                                        Ogden
  Wounded March 30, 1899.
  May 5, 1899.
Private, THOMAS SHULL                                        Mammoth
  June 28, 1899.
Private, THOS. W. THORNBURG                                    Ogden
  June 28, 1899.
Private, FREDERICK BLAKE                              Salt Lake City
  June 28, 1899.
Private, AUGUSTUS BRANSCOM                                     Ogden
  June 28, 1899.
Private, WILLIAM CROOKS                                       Eureka
  June 28, 1899.
Private, JOHN FERGUSON                                     Park City
  January 15, 1899.
Private, CHAS. I. FOX                                 Salt Lake City
  June 28, 1899.
Private, GEORGE LACEY                                          Manti
  January 10, 1899.
Private, DON C. MUSSER                                Salt Lake City
  January 17, 1899.
Private, NEPHI REESE                                     Silver City
  November 11, 1898.
Private, GEO. SIMMONS                                 Salt Lake City
  June 23, 1899.
Private, CHRIS WAGNER                                 Salt Lake City
  March 13, 1899.
Private, CARLOS YOUNG                                 Salt Lake City
  June 28, 1899.


ROLL OF HONOR.

KILLED IN ACTION.

Corporal, MORITZ C. JENSEN                               Castle Gate
  April 26, 1899.
Private, FREDERICK BUMILLER                           Salt Lake City
  April 26, 1899.
Private, MAX MADISON                                          Mercur
  April 25, 1899.
Private, GEO. H. HUDSON                                       Mercur
  August 25, 1898.

DIED OF DISEASE.

Private, RICHARD H. RALPH                                     Eureka
  July 21, 1899.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Utah Batteries: A History, by Charles R. Mabey

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE UTAH BATTERIES: A HISTORY ***

***** This file should be named 32206.txt or 32206.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/2/2/0/32206/

Produced by Graeme Mackreth and The Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
